
GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU
HISTORY
A publication under Free Textbook Programme of Government of Tamil Nadu
Department of School EducationHIGHER SECONDARY FIRST YEAR
Untouchability is Inhuman and a Crime
VOLUME - II
Government of Tamil Nadu
First Edition - 2018Tamil NaduTextbook and 
Educational Services Corporationwww.textbooksonline.tn.nic.in
State Council of Educational 
Research and Training
© SCERT 2018
Printing & PublishingContent CreationThe wisepossess allNOT FOR SALE
ii
HOW TO USE
 THE BOOK?The subject to be discussed in the lesson is introduced
Introduction
Key words and technical terms explained at the end of 
the lesson for  clarity
Glossary
For self-study and self evaluation
Exercise
Visual representations intended to make the complex simple 
and make the students grasp  difficult concepts easily
Infographs
Leads the students to animated audio, video aids for 
getting experiential learning
The scope of the lesson is presented
Learning Objectives
Provides additional information related to the subject in 
boxes to stir up the curiosity of students
Using technology for learning activities, which enables the 
students to access digital sources relevant to their lessons.
ICT Corner
Activities for ‚learning by doing™ individually or in groups 
Activities
Describe the main points briefly in bullets for 
recapitulation
Summary
List of books and net sources for further reading
References
iii
E-bookAssessmentDIGI-LinksLets use the QR code in the text books ! How ?
Ł Download the QR code scanner from the Google PlayStore/ Apple App Store into your smartphone

Ł Open the QR code scanner application

Ł Once the scanner button in the application is clicked, camera opens and then bring it closer to the QR code in the text book. 

Ł Once the camera detects the QR code, a url appears in the screen.Click the url and goto the content page.
CONTENTSChapter 12 Bahmani and Vijayanagar Kingdoms
 01Chapter 13 Cultural Syncretism: Bhakti Movement in India
 17Chapter 14 The Mughal Empire 29Chapter 15 The Marathas 61Chapter 16 The Coming of the Europeans 83Chapter 17 Effects of British Rule 108Chapter 18 Early Resistance to British Rule
 126Chapter 19 Towards Modernity
 150Glossary 165Illustration Credits 168iv
1IntroductionAt the beginning of the fourteenth century, 
when the Delhi Sultanate was preparing to 
extend southwards, the Deccan and south 
India were divided into four kingdoms: 
the Yadavas of Devagiri (Western  Deccan 
or present Maharashtra), the Hoysalas of 

Dvarasamudra (Karnataka), the Kakatiyas 
of  Warangal (eastern part of present 
Telengana) and the Pandyas of Madurai 

(southern Tamil Nadu). During the two 
expeditions of the general Malik Kafur, 
first in 1304 and then in 1310, these old 
states faced defeat one after another and 
lost most of their accumulated wealth 
to the plundering raids of the Sultanate 

army.  The Tughluq dynasty continued 

its southern expeditions into southern 
India under the rule of his military 
officers. Muhammad Tughluq (1325Œ51) 
even tried to make Devagiri (renamed as 
Daulatabad) as the capital to command the 

vast conquered territory more effectively. 
But his experiments failed and brought 
misery to the people. When he shifted 
the capital back to Delhi, his subordinates 
in the south declared independence. 

Thus Madurai became an independent 
Sultanate in 1333. Zafar Khan who 
declared independence in 1345 at Devagiri 

shifted his capital to Gulbarga in northern 
Bahmani and Vijayanagar Kingdoms12Lesson
Learning ObjectivesTo acquire knowledge in
ISources of study for Bahmani and Vijayanagar kingdoms
Foundation and consolidation of Bahmani Sultanate
Prolonged conflict between Bahmani kingdom and Vijayanagar
Military career and achievements of Mohammed Gawan
The strategic importance of Golkonda fort
IIOrigin and development of Vijayanagar kingdom by Sangama brothers
Vijayanagar and Bahmani tussle-causes and consequences
Brief rule of Saluva dynasty followed by Krishnadevaraya™s illustrious career˜
Battle of Talikotta and decline of Vijayanagar kingdom
Adminstration, Society and Economy of the Vijayanagar kingdom
Rise of Nayak kingdoms.

2Karnataka. He tookthe title, Bahman Shah 
and the dynasty he inaugurated became 
known as the Bahmani dynasty (1347Œ
1527).  A few years earlier, in 1336, the 
Vijayanagar kingdom was inaugurated by 
the Sangama brothers Harihara and Bukka 

at Vijayanagara (presentday Hampi) on 
the south bank of Tungabhadra. During 
the next two centuries these two states 

fought continually and bitterly,  to control 
the rich Raichur 
doab
, and also the sea 
ports of Goa, Honavar, etc. on the west 

coast, which were the supply points of the 
horses needed for their army. 
SourcesThere are several 

kinds of sourcesŒ 
literary, epigraphical, 
and archaeologicalŒ 
available for the study 
of this period. Several Persian accounts 

written by the court historians of the 
Bahmani Sultanate, relating to BahmaniŒ
Vijayanagar conflicts have survived. 

Though they contain some biased and 
exaggerated information they providerare 
eye-witness accounts relating to the battles, 
the palace intrigues, the life and sufferings 
of the people on either side, etc. which are 

lacking in inscriptions. The Kannada and 
Telugu literature, like 
Manucharitram
, Saluvabhyudayam
, etc., patronized in 
the Vijayanagar court, give genealogical, 
political and social information. The 

Telugu work 
Rayavachakamu
 gives 
interesting details about the Nayak system 

under Krishnadevaraya.  Several foreign 

visitors who came to South India during 
the fourteenth to sixteenth centuries 
wrote about their travels which throw 
useful light on the political, social, and 
cultural aspects.  Of them, Ibn Battutah 

a Moroccan traveller  (1333-45), Abdur 
Razzak from Persia (1443Œ45), Nikitin, a 
Russian (1470Œ74), the Portuguese visitors 
Domingo Paes and Nuniz  (1520Œ35) 
 provide remarkably rich information.  
Thousands of inscriptions in Kannada, 
Tamil, and Telugu, besides a number 
of copper-plate charters in Sanskrit are 
available and the above sources add to the 

epigraphical information.  There are a rich 
variety of archaeological sources in the 
form of temples, palaces, forts, mosques, 

etc.  Numismatic evidence is also available 
in abundance. 
The Vijayanagara kings issued a large 
number of gold coins called 
Varaha 
(also called 
Pon
 in Tamil  and 
Honnu
 in Kannada). These gold coins have the 
images of various Hindu deities and 

animals like the bull, the elephant and 

the fabulous 
gandaberunda
 (a double 
eagle, sometimes holding an elephant 

in each beak and claw). The legend 

contains the king™s name either in Nagari 

or in Kannada script. 
Krishnedevaraya - Gold coins
I12.1 Bahmani KingdomAlaudin Hasan Bahman Shah (1347Œ1358)Rivalry with the Vijayanagar kingdom over 
the fertile Raichur doab, lying between the 
Krishna and Tungabhadra rivers, not only 
marked the early history of the Bahmani 
kingdom, but continued to be an enduring 
feature over two centuries.  Bahman Shah 

had also to contend in the east with the 

3the Marathas later. He appointed a council 
of eight ministers of state: 1. 
Vakil-us-
saltana 
or lieutenant of the kingdom, the 
immediate subordinate of the sovereign. 2.  
Waziri-kull, 
who supervised the work of all 
other ministers; 3. 
Amir-i-jumla
, minister of 
˚nance; 4. 
Wasir-i-ashraf
, minister of foreign 

a˛airs and master of ceremonies; 5. 
Nazir
, assistant minister for ˚nance;  6
. Peshwa
 who 
was associated with the lieutenant of the 
kingdom;  7. 
Kotwal
 or chief of police and 
city magistrate in the capital, and  8. 
Sadr-i-
jahan
 or chief justice and minister of religious 
a˛airs and endowments.  He took strong 
measures for the suppression of highway 
robbery.  Institutional and geographic 
consolidation under Muhammad Shah laid 
a solid foundation for the kingdom.  He built 
two mosques at Gulbarga. One, the great 

mosque, completed in 1367, remainsan 
impressive building.  
The next hundred years saw a 
number of Sultans one after another, by 

succession or usurpation. All of them 
fought with their southern neighbour, but 
without gaining much territory.   In 1425 
Warangal was subdued and their progress 

further eastwards was challenged  by the 
Orissan rulers.  The capital was shifted 
from Gulbarga to Bidar in 1429.   The rule 
of Mohammad III (1463Œ1482) is worthy 
of mention because of his lieutenant 

Mohammed Gawan, a  great statesman. 
Mohammed GawanA Persian by birth, Mohammed Gawan 

was well-versed in Islamic theology, 
Persian, and Mathematics. He was also a 
poet and a prose-writer. The Mohammed 
Gawan Madrasa in Bidar, with a large 
library, containing 3000 manuscripts, is 

illustrative of his scholarship.  Gawan 
served with great distinction as prime 
minister under Mohammad III and 

contributed extensively to the dynamic 
development of the Bahmani Kingdom. 
rulers of Warangal and Orissa.   In order 
to facilitate smooth administration, as 
followed in the Delhi Sultanate, he divided 
the kingdom into four territorial divisions 
called 
tarafs
, each under a governor. Each 
governor commanded the army of his 
province (Gulbarga, Daulatabad, Bidar, 
and Berar) and was solely responsible for 
both its administration and the collection 
of revenue. The system worked well under 
a powerful king, but its dangers became 

apparent under a weak ruler.  For the 
greater part of his reign of eleven years 
Bahman was engaged in subduing the 

unruly in his kingdom and in establishing 
order.  His attempt to exact an annual 
tribute from the state of Warangal, the 
Reddi kingdoms of Rajahmundry and 
Kondavidu, led to frequent wars. Bahman 

Shah emerged victorious in all these 
expeditions and assumed the title Second 
Alexander on his coins. 
Mohammed I (1358Œ1375) Mohammed I succeeded Bahman Shah. 

There was a decade-long war with 
Vijayanagar, most of which related to 
control over the Raichur doab. Neither 
side gained lasting control over the  
region, in spite of the huge fatalities in 

battles.  Two bitter wars with Vijayanagar 
gained him nothing. But his attack on 
Warangal in 1363 brought him a large 

indemnity, including the important 
fortress of˜Golkonda and the treasured 
turquoise throne, which thereafter became 
the throne of the Bahmani kings. 
Turquoise is a semi-precious stone sky 
blue in colour. Turquoise throne is one 
of the bejewelled royal seats of Persian 

kings described in Firdausi™s 
Shah Nama. 
Mohammed I established a good 
system of government that was followed 
by all the successor sultanates as well as by 

4the existing four provinces of the Bahmani 
Sultanate into eight. ˝is not only limited 
the area under the rule of each governor 
but also made the provincial administration 
more manageable. He placed some districts 
in the provinces directly under central 

administration. Gawan sought to curtail 
the military powers of the governors by 
allowing them to occupy only one fort in 

their territory. ˝e other forts remained 
Gawan fought successful wars against 
the rulers of Konkan, Orissa and Vijayanagar.  

He was known for his administrative 

reforms. He used Persian chemists to teach 
the preparation and the use of gunpowder. 
In his war against the Vijayanagar Kings 
in Belgaum, he used gunpowder.  In order 
to tighten the administration and to curb 

the power of provincial governors, who 
functioned virtually as kings, Gawan divided 
Golkonda FortThe Raja Krishna Dev of the Kakatiya dynasty with Warangal as capital constructed the 
Golkonda Fort on a granite hill.  During 1495Œ1496 the fort was handed over to Sultan Kali 

Kutub Khan as a Jagir (land grant).  He reconstructed and rechristened the mud fort into 

a granite fort and called the place Muhammed Nagar. Later, the Golkonda fort came into 

the possession of the Bahmani dynasty. Still later, the Qutub Shahi dynasty took over and 

made Golkonda its capital. Golkonda fort owes much of its present grandeur to Mohammad 

Quli Qutub Shah, the fifth sultan of Qutb Shahi dynasty. The subsequent generations saw 

Golkonda being fortified further with several additions and the formation of a beautiful city 

within. By the 17th century, Golkonda was famous as a diamond market. It gave the world 

some of the best-known diamonds, including the ‚Kohinoor™.
The Golkonda Fort is located about 11 kms from Hyderabad on a hill 120 meters 
hight.  The Golkonda Fort is popular for its acoustic architecture. The highest point of the 

fort is Bala Hissar.  There is said to be a secret underground tunnel which leads from the 

Durbar Hall to one of the palaces at the foot of the hills.
The Golkonda Fort also houses the tombs of the Qutub Shahis.  There are two 
individual pavilions on the outer side of Golkonda which serve as major architectural 

attractions.  The Fort comprises four other small forts within itself. It has cannons, draw 

bridges, royal chambers, halls, temples, mosques, stables, etc.  The Fateh Darwaza or the 

Victory Gate is the entrance to the fort. Aurangzeb laid siege to this Golkonda fort in 1687 

for about eight months but in vain. It was due to the treachery of an Afghan gate keeper, the 

fort finally fell. 
Golkonda Fort
5who were considered the strongest pillars of 
the state began to leave for their provinces, 
leading to the disintegration of the 
Sultanate. A˙er the Sultan™s death ˚ve of his 
descendants succeeded him on the throne 
but they were kings only in name. During 

this period the Sultanate gradually broke up 
into four independent kingdoms: Bijapur, 
Ahmadnagar, Berar and Golkonda.   Bidar 

where the Bahmani Sultan ruled as a puppet 
became the ˚˙h one.  Among these  Bijapur  
became powerful by annexing Bidar and 
Berar in course of time. ˝ough Ahmadnagar 
and Golkonda acted independently they 

˚nally joined with Bijapur to ˚ght with their 
common enemy, Vijayanagar. Vijayanagar 
was utterly routed in the battle of Talikota 
or 
Rakshashi-Tangadi
 in 1565. ˝erea˙er, 
within a century, the Sultanates were 
vanquished one a˙er another and taken 
over by the Mughal state. 
under the Sultan™s direct control. ˝e royal 
oˆcers who were given land assignments as 
pay were made accountable to the Sultan for 
their income and expenditure.
˝e administrative reforms 
introduced by Gawan improved the 
eˆciency of the government, but curtailed 
the powers of the provincial chiefs, who were 

mostly Deccanis. So the already existing 
rivalry among the two groups of nobles, 
Deccani Muslims and Pardesi (foreigner) 
Muslims, further intensi˚ed and conˇicts 
broke out. Gawan became a victim of this 

tussle for power, although he remained 
fair and neutral in this conˇict. Jealous of 
his success they forged a letter to implicate 
Gawan in a conspiracy against the Sultan. 
Sultan, who himself was not happy with 

Gawan™s dominance, ordered his execution.
Gawan™s execution augured ill for 
the Sultanate. Several of the foreign nobles 
Lakshadweep islands(INDIA)Andaman and nicobar islands(INDIA)BAY OFBENGALARABIANSEAINDIAN OCEANMap not to scaleNSWEBurhanpurDevagiri
Berar
AhmadnagarSurat
DiuBidarGulbargaBijapurTalikota
Raichur DoahHampiGoaSringeriHalebidKanchiTanjavurMadurai
CalicutUdipiSrirangam
KrishnaPenukondaThirupathiGolcondaWarangalGodavari
Bahmani kingdomVijayanagar kingdom

6The Vijayanagar kingdom was 
successively ruled by four dynasties over a 
period of more than three hundred years: 
the Sangama dynasty (1336Œ1485), the 
Saluva dynasty (1485Œ1505), the Tuluva 
dynasty (1505Œ1570) and the Aravidu 

dynasty (1570Œ1650). The history of this 
kingdom can be narrated in four stages. 
In the beginning, the Vijayanagar 
kingdom was one among many small 

principalities of the time, under the rule of 
some local chiefs in di˛erent parts of south 

India. ˝e three big states of the thirteenth 
century, the Pandyas in Tamil Nadu, the 
Hoysalas in Karnataka and the Kakatiyas in 
Andhra had almost been destroyed by the 
military expeditions of the Delhi Sultanate 

in the ˚rst three decades of the fourteenth 
century, leaving a big political vacuum.  ˝e 
turbulent political situation provided an 

opportunity to the ˚ve Sangama brothers, 
headed by Harihara, to consolidate and 
expand the territory.   Besides, the Muslim 
Sultanate that had been established in 
Madurai a little earlier and the Bahmani 

Sultanate that came up in 1347 started to 
rule independently of Delhi.  ˝e Delhi 
Sultanate itself became weak and did not 
take much interest in the south. 
Within the ˚rst four decades the small 
principality became a big kingdom  through 
the military activities of the ˚ve brothers 
in di˛erent directions. First the entire core 
area of the Hoysala kingdom in Karnataka 

was incorporated into Vijayanagar. ˝e 
coastal parts of Karnataka were soon taken 
over and remained an important part of the 

kingdom until the end. As this gave access to 
several port towns, good care was taken to 
administer this part under a successive line 
of 
pradhani
 or governors. Under Bukka I, 
attention was turned to  Tondai-mandalam, 
covering the northern districts of Tamil 
area,   which was under the rule of the 
Sambuvaraya chiefs.  ˝e prince Kampana 
(usually called Kumara Kampana), son of 
Bukka I, carried out this work successfully 
II 12.2 Vijayanagar EmpireOrigin and Expansion˝ere are di˛erent traditions regarding the 

foundation of the Vijayanagar kingdom. It 
is now generally accepted, on the basis of 
contemporary inscriptions, that the two 
brothers Harihara and Bukka, the eldest 
sons of one Sangama, earlier serving the 

Hoysala rulers of Karnataka, asserted their 
independence and laid foundation for a 
new kingdom in about 1336. ˝is happened 

soon a˙er the death of the Hoysala king 
Ballala III at the hands of the Madurai 
Sultan. Initially the capital was in or near 
about Anegondi on the north bank of the 
Tungabhadra river.But soon it was shi˙ed 

to the Hoylsala town Hosapattana (near 
Hampi) on the south bank. ˝e capital was 
expanded and renamed Vijayanagara, the 
city of Victory.  ˝erea˙er, they proclaimed 
themselves the rulers of Vijayanagara 

or of  Karnata-Vijayanagara. Harihara 
celebrated his coronation in 1346 at this 
city.  Historians call this dynasty started 

by Harihara  as Sangama a˙er the name of 
his father or forefather. Vijayanagara rulers 
adopted the emblem of the Chalukyas, the 
boar, or 
varaha
as their royal insignia.
According to somelater-day tradition, 
Vidyaranya (also called Madhava), a 
renowned Saiva saint and Sanskrit scholar, 

is said to have persuaded the brothers to 

abandon their service to the Tughluqs 

and also to renounce Islam that they had 

adopted when they were imprisoned by 

the Sultanin Delhi. Vidyaranya is believed 

to have played an important role in the 

foundation of the Vijayanagara kingdom. 

˝is is doubtfulas, according to some 

inscriptions,Vidyaranya lived atthe end of 

the fourteenth century, nearly sixty years 

a˙erthe foundation of Vijayanagar.

7not make much headway until the time of 
Devaraya II (1422Œ46), who defeated the 
Orissan army in some battles. But these 
conquests were only to extract tribute, and 
no territory was added. Devaraya II was 
the greatest ruler of the Sangama dynasty. 

He strengthened his cavalry by recruiting 
trained Muslim cavalry for his army and 
giving archery training to his soldiers. 

Abdur Razaak, the Persian ambassador 
who visited the Zamorin of Kochi and the 
Vijayanagar court during this time states 
that Devaraya II controlled a vast area. 
He received tribute from the king of Sri 

Lanka too.  
Viyayanagar empire went through a 
crisis after Devaraya II. Quarrels on account 

of succession and the inefficient successors 
encouraged the Gajapati king to dominate 
the coastal Andhra. Between 1460Œ65, the 

Gajapati army attacked many times and it 
conducted a victorious expedition even 
up to Tiruchirappalli on the Kaveri river, 
causing much destruction on the way and 
plundering the wealth of many temples.  

Taking advantage of the situation, the 
feudatories assumed independence. Thus, 
Tirumalaideva and then Konerideva began 
to rule independently in the ThanjavurŒ
Tiruchirappalli area for some decades, 

during the interregnum before the rise of 
the Saluva rule.
Power passed on to the trusted 
commander Saluva Narasimha who 

defended the kingdom from the Gajapatis 
and recovered parts of coastal Andhra. 

Around 1485 Saluva Narasimha usurped 
the throne and declared himself as king, 
starting the short-lived Saluva dynasty. 
He was assisted by his general and great 
warrior Narasa Nayak, who tried to quell 

the rebellious local chiefs in the south.  
Saluva Narasimha died in 1491 leaving 
his young sons under the care of Narasa 

Nayak.  Narasa Nayak became the de facto 
ruler and took several steps to safeguard 
the country until his death. In about 
with the help of his faithful general Maraya-

Nayak.  He is also given credit for slaying the 
Madurai Sultan and bringing to an end that 
Sultanate in about 1370. ˝is is mentioned in 
Madura-vijayam
, a Sanskrit work written by 
Kampana™s wife, Gangadevi.   But strangely, 
the Pandya country including Madurai was 
not annexed to the Vijayanagar  kingdom at 
that time. It became a part of the kingdom 

only around 1500, more than a hundred 
years later.  Until then only the northern 
and central parts of the Tamil country up 
to the Kaveri delta were under the direct 
administration of the Sangama and Saluva 

dynasties. 
From the beginning, both the Bahmani 

and Vijayangar kingdoms were in constant 
conflict.  The contest for territory, 
tribute, and the control of horse trade 
were the major subjects of conflict. Each 
of them wanted to annex and dominate 

the fertile area between the Krishna and 
the Tungabhadra (the Raichur doab).  
Though neither of them succeeded fully, 

much bloodshed took place for some 
transitory success.  Some historians argue 
that religious rivalry between the Hindu 
Vijayanagar and the Muslim Sultanate was 
the basic cause of this continuous fight. 

Actually the Vijayanagar kings fought also 
with many Hindu, non-Muslim rulers, like 
those of Warangal, Kondavidu, Orissa, 
etc., in which Muslim rulers took part as 
allies sometimes and as enemies on other 

times.  The control of horse trade that 
passed through Goa and other ports was 
another reason for the fighting.  Horses 

were necessary for the armies of both 
sides.  In spite of continuous fighting, the 
Krishna river was more or less the dividing 
line between the two powers.  
In coastal Andhra, the power struggle 
was between the Gajapati kingdom of 

Orissa and Vijayanagar. Vijayanagar could 

8Bhatkal. Though he was quite successful 
for a time,  his victories made the warring  
Bahmani sultans to become united for 
their survival. 
There are some other reasons 
for the celebration of Krishnadevaraya 

as the greatest ruler of Vijayanagar. He 
made very large donations to many of 
the greatest Siva and Vishnu temples of 

the day- Srisailam, Tirupati, Kalahasti, 
Kanchipuram, Tiruvannamalai, 
Chidambaram, etc. He added towering  
gopuras to many of those temples, which 

survive to this day. Contemporary foreign 
visitors  like Paes and Nuniz, who visited 
Vijayanagar  left glowing tributes to 
his personality, and the grandeur and 
opulence of the city.  His court was also 

adorned by some great poets like Allasani 
Peddana.  He himself is considered a great 
scholar and is author of the famous poem 

Amuktamalyada (the story of Andal).   
But his crowning achievement, as a clever 
administrator, was the reorganization of 
the 
Nayak
 or 
nayankara
 system and giving 
legal recognition to the system. This is 
explained below under administration. 
The battle of Talikota At Krishnadevaraya‚s death, his son 

was a small child and so his younger 
brother Achyutadevaraya became 
king. Soon some succession disputes 
started as Ramaraya, the son-in-law of 
Krishnadevaraya wanted to dominate the 

affairs by crowning the infant as king.  
Achyutadevaraya was however supported 
by Chellappa (also known as Saluva 

Nayak), the greatest Nayak of the day who 
controlled a major part of the Tamil area.  
Soon after, however,  Chellapa became a 
rebel himself and Achyutadevaraya had 
to take a big expedition to the south to 

subdue him. He had some encounters 
with the Deccan sultans too. After his 
death in 1542, his nephew Sadasivaraya 
1505, his elder son Viranarasimha started 
the third dynasty, known as the Tuluva 
dynasty. He had a short but eventful reign 

and was succeeded by his younger brother 
Krishnadevaraya.
Krishnadevaraya (1509Œ29)Krishnadevaraya is considered the greatest 
of the Vijayanagar kings.  He built upon the 
strong military base laid by his father and 
elder brother. He tried to keep the greatness 
of the kingdom intact, by undertaking 
many military expeditions during much of 

his reign.  Early in his reign he fought with 
the rebellious Ummattur chief (near about 
Mysore) and brought him to submission. 

He then had to fight almost continuously 
on two fronts, one against the traditional 
enemy, the Bahmani Sultans and the other 
against the Orissa king Gajapati. There are 
several inscriptions graphically describing 

his seizure of many forts like Udayagiri, 
under the control of Gajapati, during the 
course of this eastern expedition. Finally, 
he put a pillar of victory at Simhachalam.  
Krishnadevaraya had to undertake 
more than one expedition to repulse the 

Bahmani forces, which were intruding 
into his territory on a regular annual 

basis. In some of these ventures the 
Portuguese, trying to establish their 
power in the Malabar and Konkan coast, 
helped Krishanadevaraya with military 
aid, and got permission to build a fort at 
Krishnadevarayar

9armies entered the Vijayanagar city for the 
first time in their history, and ransacked it 
for several months laying it waste. 
This battle is generally considered 
the signal for the end of Vijayanagar. The 
king Sadasiva and some of his retinue 

escaped to Penugonda.   Tirumala, 
brother of Ramaraya, declared himself 
king in 1570, starting the Aravidu, that 

is the fourth dynasty.    After this his 
sons and grandsons ruled the truncated 
kingdom for two generations, probably 
up to 1630.  There were some more 
kings who ruled as fugitives until 1670 

without a permanent capital. Real 
power was wielded by the many Nayak 
chiefs in various parts of the country. 
Some of them feigned loyalty to the 
king while others opposed him.  There 

were fights between the loyalists and 
others. In 1601 there was bitter fighting 
near Uttaramerur between the loyalist 

Yachama Nayak of Perumbedu and 
the Nayak of Vellur (Vellore).   In this 
quarrel Vellur Nayak was supported by 
Tanjavur, Madurai and Senji Nayak, who 
had become independent rulers. 
succeeded him and ruled for about thirty 

years (1542Œ70). But real power lay in the 
hands of Ramaraya, who got support from 
many of his close kinsmen (of Aravidu 
clan) by appointing them as Nayak of 
many strategic localities.  
Ramaraya, a great warrior and 
strategist, was able to play off the Bahmani 

Muslim powers against one another.  He 

entered into a commercial treaty with the 
Portuguese whereby the supply of horses 
to the Bijapur ruler was stopped. He fought 
with the Bijapur ruler and after some time, 
he allied with the Bijapur ruler against 

Golkonda and Ahmadnagar.  This  divide 
and rule policy provoked much enmity 
against Vijayanagar. Forgetting their 
mutual quarrels, the Deccan states, joined 
hands to wage the last great battle against 

their common enemy. The battle was 
fought at Talikota or  Rakshasi-Tangadi in 
January 1565 in which  Ramaraya,  in spite 

of his old age, personally commanded the 
forces along with his cousins and brothers. 
In the final stages, the battle was lost. 
Ramaraya was imprisoned and executed 
immediately. The victorious Bahmani 
Battle of Talikota

10by the Delhi Sultanate at that time. But 
in the Vijayanagar kingdom the regular 
assignment of revenue yielding territory in 
return for military service is clearly found 
only from about 1500 or a little earlier. 
Inscriptions refer to this revenue assignment 

as nayakkattanam in Tamil, Nayaktanam 
in Kannada, and nayankaramu in Telugu.
˝e practice became established during 

the reign of Krishnadevaraya and Achyuta 
Devaraya. ˝is is supported by the evidence 
of inscriptions and by the accounts of Nuniz 
and Paes. Nuniz says that the Vijayanagar 
kingdom at that time was divided between 

more than two hundred captains (his 
translation for Nayak) and they were 
compelled in turn to keep certain number 
of military forces (horses and foot soldiers) 
to serve the king in times of need:  they were 

also required to pay certain amount of the 
revenue to the king in particular times of a 
year, like during the nine-day Mahanavami 

festival. Nuniz™ statement is also supported 
by Telugu work 
Rayavachakamu
, which 
refers to the practice during the time of 

Krishnadevaraya. Later-day vamsavalis 
(family history) of the Palayagars, who 

were mostly successors of the old Nayak 
families, support the fact that the Nayak 
system was perfected during the time of 
Krishnadevaraya.  Most of these Nayak 
were the Kannadiga and Telugu warriors 

besides some local chiefs.  ˝ey belonged to 
di˛erent castes, Brahmana as well as non-
Brahmana. ˝e non-Brahmana Nayak again 

had di˛erent social backgrounds: traditional 
warrior groups, pastoral and forest clans 
(Yadava, Billama), peasant families (Reddi), 
merchants (Balija) and so on.  Some of the 
prominent Nayak, like Chellappa under 

Krishnadevaraya, were brahmanas.
This system worked smoothly 
as long as there were strong kings like 
Krishnadevaraya. These chiefs controlled 
production within  their 
Nayaktanam
 territories by creating commercial centres  
(pettai
)  and markets, by encouraging 
12.3 AdministrationThe king was the ultimate authority in 
the kingdom.  He was also the supreme 
commander of the army.  He was assisted 
by several high-ranking officers.  The chief 
minister was known as the mahapradhani. 
He led a number of lower-ranking officers, 

like  Dalavay (commander), Vassal (guard 
of the palace), Rayasam (secretary/
accountant), Adaippam (personal 

attendant),  and Kariya-karta (executive 
agents).   As  Harihara I and his immediate 
successors consolidated their territorial  
acquisitions,  they  tried  to organize the 
territory  by  creating  administrative  

divisions  called  
rajya
s or  provinces each 
under  a governor called 
pradhani
.  Some 
of the prominent rajyas were the Hoysala 
rajya, Araga, Barakur (Mangalur), and 
Muluvay. As and when new conquests 

were made they were put under new 
rajyas. By 1400, there were five rajyas in 
the Tamil area: Chandragiri, Padaividu, 

Valudalampattu, Tiruchirappalli and 
Tiruvarur. The 
pradhani
was either a royal 
member or a  military officer not related 

to the royal family. The 
pradhani
 had his 
own revenue accountants and military to 
assist in his administration.   Within each 
rajya, there were smaller administrative 
divisions like nadu, sima, sthala, kampana, 
etc. The lowest unit was of course the 
village. The
 rajya
s lost their administrative 
and revenue status under the Tuluva 
dynasty due to the development of the 
Nayak system under Krishadevaraya.
Nayak System˝e term Nayak is used from thirteenth 

century onwards in Telugu and Kannada 
areas in the sense of a military leader or 
simply soldier. Assigning the revenue of 
a particular locality to the Nayak for their 
military service is found in the Kakatiya 

kingdom during the thirteenth century. 
˝is is similar to the 
iqta
 system practiced 

11settlement  of  cultivators  and  artisans 
with tax concessions, by creating  and  
maintaining  irrigation  facilities, etc.  
Many of them started as high officials 
(commander, governor,accountant,   etc.)  
and served as the king™s agents.  After 

the Talikota battle, the Nayak chiefs 
became more or less independent of the 
Vijayanagar king. Some of them, like 

those of Madurai, Tanjavur, Ikkeri, etc.
established powerful states controlling 
many smaller chiefs under them. The 
seventeenth century was the century of 
these bigger Nayak kingdoms.
12.4 Society and EconomyContinuous warfare and the resultant 

widespread su˛erings were common features 
of all early and medieval societies. Bahmani 
and Vijayanagar period is no exception to 
this.  Perhaps the scale looks larger due to the 
availability of many eye-witness accounts. 

˝e other consequences which were enduring 
over the centuries were the displacement 
and migration of people. During the three 

centuries of this chapter,  we ˚nd such 
migrations everywhere.  ˝e conˇicts in 
the Bahmani courts were much due to the 
migration of Turks, Afghans and Persians 
into the Deccan.  As far the Vijayanagar area 
is concerned there took place migrations 
of Kannada and Telugu warriors and their 
followers into Tamil areas and elsewhere.  

Many of the Nayaka chiefs belong to these 
language groups.  Peasants, artisans and other 
toiling groups were also part of this migration.  
˝e other consequence was the widening 
gap between the ruling class and the ruled. 

All the foreign visitors refer to the enormous 
riches and a˘uence enjoyed by the rulers, the 
oˆcials and the upper echelons in the capital 

cities like Vijayanagar, Bijapur, and the like, 
in contrast to widespread poverty among the 
masses. ˝ey also refer to the prevalence of 
slavery.   
The state had to derive their 
revenue only by taxing the people.  It is 

found that during the Sangama dynasty 
when the Vijayanagar rule was extended 

to new areas, their officers were harsh in 
tax collection, which provoked the toiling 
people to rise in revolt.  One such revolt 

took place in 1430 in central parts of 
Tamil Nadu.  This was the revolt in which 
all the basic producers joined forgetting 
Little Kingdoms in Ramanathapuram and PudukottaiThe kingdom of Ramnad was inaugurated by the Madurai Nayak Muthu Krishnappa in the 
early years of the seventeenth century. The inhabitants with martial tradition had served as 

soldiers under Pandyan, Chola and Vijayanagar kings, and were spread into Tirunelveli and 

other southern parts of Tamil country. They also served in the armies of Nayak rulers and 

were traditional Kavalkarars, whose responsibility was to give protection to village, temple 

and other administrative bodies. The temple at Rameswaram was under the protection of 

a kaval chief who also assumed the title of Udaiyan Sethupati (meaning the Chief who was 

lord of bridge or causeway, as he controlled the passage between Rameswaram and Ceylon).
Pudukottai was a small principality situated between the Nayak kingdoms of 
Thanjavur and Madurai. It constituted a buffer between the Chola kingdom and the Pandyas. 

Like the inhabitants of Ramanathapuram, Pudukottai also had inhabitants belonging 

to martial tradition. Hence their region could attain the status of ﬁlittle kingdomﬂ under 

Tondaimans. The Tondaimans served great royal households of Raja Sethupathi and Nayak 

kings of Madurai and Thanjavur.

12With the beginning of the era of money 
economy, circulation and use of coined 
money increased manifold.  Artisans like 
weavers, smiths, and masons became more 
prominent in the society.  These non-
agrarian groups were generally called the 

pattadai
or (workshop people) and 
kasaya-
vargam
 -that is- the group that pays taxes 
in cash.  Large number of commercial 

and weaving centres came up in northern 
Tamil Nadu, Rayalasima and coastal 
Andhra.  Naturally the textiles formed 
an important commodity exported from 
south Indian ports. Textiles became main 

commercial attractions for the Portuguese 
and other European traders who started 
coming from the early sixteenth century. 
their caste differences.  The revolt took 

place due to the unjust and arbitrary tax 
demands of the government including the 
pradhani
 (governor), his military bodies, 
and the landlords.  It is said the Vijayanagar 

Prince intervened and pacified the 

revolting people by allowing tax reduction.  
During the sixteenth century, under the 
Nayak system, the local Nayakas tried to 

encourage craft production, like weaving, 
by giving tax concessions now and then.
The Vijayanagar period witnessed 
striking development in the field of non-

agrarian crafts.  Until the thirteenth 
century the economy was mainly 
agrarian.  From the fourteenth onwards 
the economy became more commercial. 
SUMMARYIRole of Bahman Shah and Mohammad I, former in founding and latter in 

consolidating the Bahmani kingdom is dealt with.
Endemic wars between 
Vijayanagar and Bahmani rulers over the Raichur-Doab 
region, exhausting both the kingdoms financially, are described.
The split of Bahmani Sultanate into five Deccan Sultanates is narrated.
The striking structure of Golkonda fort and its significance are highlighted˜
IIEstablishment of Vijayanagar kingdom by Sangama brothers is traced.
The expansionist policy of Vijayanagar, hindered by the presence of Bahmani 

Sultanate, leading to constant wars between the two˜kingdoms is
˜detailed.
Brief rule of Saluva dynasty and the glorious reign of Krishnadevaraya of Tuluva 

dynasty are explored
The Battle of Talikota and the emergence of nayak kingdoms are explained.
The Adminstration, Society and Economy of the Vijayanagar Empire are analysed

13EXERCISE I Choose the correct answer
 1. Harihara and Bukka were in the services of 
______________ before they founded 
Vijayanagar kingdom.
 a) Kakatiyas
 b) Hoysalas
 c) Bijapur Sultan
 (d) Yadavas
 2. Ibn Battutah was a _____ traveller
 a) Moroccan
 b) Venetian
 c) Portuguese
 d) Chinese
 3. Arrange the following chronologically:
 a) ˝e Sangama dynasty, the Aravidu dynasty. ˝e Saluva dynasty, the Tuluva dynasty.
 b) ˝e Sangama dynasty, the Saluva dynasty, the Tuluva dynasty, the Aravidu dynasty.
 c) ˝e Saluva dynasty. the Sangama dynasty, the Tuluva dynasty, the Aravidu dynasty.
 d) ˝e Sangama dynasty, the Tuluva dynasty, the Saluva dynasty, the Aravidu dynasty.
 4. The emblem of the Vijayanagar Kingdom was _____
 a)  Varaha
 b)  Tiger
 c)   Fish
 d)  Bow
 5. _____ poem was composed by Gangadevi
 a) Manucharitram
 b) Amuktamalyada
 c) Panduranga Mahatiyam
 d) Madura Vijayam
 6.  _____ was the greatest ruler of the Sangama dynasty.
 a) Devaraya I
 b) Devaraya II
 c) Krishnadevaraya
 d) Veera Narsasimha 
 7. Krishnadevaraya planted the pillar of victory at _______.
 a) Belgaum 
 b) Cuttack 
 c) Simhachalam 
 d) Rajamahendravaram 
 8. Pudukkottai, a small principality, was a buffer between _______
 a) Chola and Vijayanagar Kingdoms 
 b) Chola and Pandya Kingdoms 
 c) Chera and Pandya Kingdodms 
 d) Chola and Chera Kingdoms 
 9. Shah Nama was written by ______
 a) Firdausi
 b) Ibn Battutah
 c) Nicolo de conti
 d) Domingo peas
 10. Mohammed Gawan Madrasa is a large library containing a collection of 3000 manuscripts 
situated at _______ _______
  a) Berar 
 b) Bijapur
 c) Bidar 
 d) Anmadnagar
 11. ____________ constructed the Golkonda Fort.
 a) Raja Krishna Dev
 b) Sultan Kali Kutub Khan
 c) Mohammed
 Gawan
 d) Bahman Shah

14 II Find out the correct statement 
 1. Vijayanagar kingdom was ruled by the kings of five dynasties for a period of more than 
300  years
 2. As far as coastal Andhra is concerned, the power struggle was between the Gajapathi 

kingdom of Orissa and Vijayanagar
 3. Abdur Razzak , the Persian ambassador, visited Zamorin of Kochi
 4. The Bahmani kings issued large number of gold coins bearing the images of various deities.
 III Find out the correct answer 
from the following 
 A (i) Mohammed I established a good system of government that was followed by all the 

successor  sultanates and also later by the 
Marath
as. (ii) Gawan used Portuguese chemist to teach the preparation and use of gun power
 a) (i) and (ii) are correct 
 b) (i) and (ii) are wrong
 c) (i) is correct ; (ii) is wrong 
 d) (i) is wrong; (ii) is correct 
 B  Assertion (A):
 Bahman  Shah attempted to exact an annual tribute from the state of 

Warrangal, the Reddi Kingdoms Rajamundry and Kondavidu 
  Reason (R):
  This led to frequent wars.
 a) A is correct, R is not the correct explanation of A
 b) A is correct, R is wrong.
 c) A and R are wrong.
 d) A is correct, R is the correct explanation of A
 IV Match the following
 1. Abdul Razzak
 - Russia
 2. Nikitin
 - Saluva  Nayak
 3. Domingo Peas and Nuniz
 - Persia
 4. Chellappa
 - Portugal
 a) 1, 2, 3, 4 b) 4, 3, 2, 1 c) 2, 1, 4, 3 d) 3, 1, 4 ,2 V. Answer briefly
 1. What are the archaeological sources to know about the Vijayanagar Kingdom?
 2. Name the founders of city of Vijayanagar.   How did it get its name?
 3. Mention the three areas where there was a clash of interest between the Vijayanagar and 

Bahmani Kingdoms.
 4. Write a note on ﬁtarafsﬂ.
 5. What do you know about Mohammed I?

15 VI. Write a short note on each of the following
 1. How did the Bahmani  Kingdom emerge?  Name its founder.
 2. Nayak System.
 3. Battle of Rakshasi Œ Tangadi (1565)
 4. Explain the reason for the celebration of Krishnadevaraya as the greatest ruler of 
Vijayanagar.
 5. Who assumed the title ﬁSecond Alexanderﬂ.  Why?
 6. Explain the location of Golkonda fort and its splendour.
 VII. Answer in detail
 1. Describe the Society and Economy of the Vijayanagar Empire
 2. Describe the administration under the Vijayanagar rulers.
 3. Give an account of the reign of Mohammed I of Bahmani kingdom.
 4. Describe the military campaigns and the administrative machinery under Mahmud 

Gawan.
 VIII. Activities
 1. On the outline map of India, mark the extent of Vijayanagar and Bahmani Kingdoms.
 2. Collect information on the court jester Tenali Rama in the court of Krishnadevaraya
  IX. Assignments
 1. Prepare an album with the pictures of temples of Vijayanagar period and the ruins of 

Hampi.
 2. Attempt a brief biographical sketch of important foreign travelers who visited Vijayanagar.
GLOSSARYAccumulated gatheredPatronisesponsorAccountable responsibleConspiracy plotVanquishedconqueredFeudatories chieftains holding land under feudal systemTruncated reduced in size

16  REFERENCES 1. Benjamin B. Cohen, 
Kingship and Colonialism in India™s Deccan
 (1850 to 1948), 
Macmillan, 2007.
 2. A.L. Basham, 
A Cultural History of India
, Oxford University Press, 1984
 3. Firroqui Salma Ahmad, 
A Comprehensive History of Medieval India from the Twelfth 
to the Mid-Eighteenth Century
, Pearson, 2011
 4. Burton Stein, The New Cambridge History of India: Vijayanagara, Cambridge 
University Press.
 5. Abraham Eraly, 
The Age of Wrath
, Penguin, 2014.
TIME LINE  (AD/CE)Foundation  of  Vijayanagar kingdom
1336Foundation  of  Bahmani kingdom
1347Foundation  of  Thuluva dynasty
1503Coronation  of  Krishna Devaraya
1509Rise of Deccan Sultanates
 (split of Bahmani Kingdom)
1518Death  of  Krishna Devaraya
1529Battle of  Talikota
1565
17IntroductionLike all cultural traditions, religion too 
does not exist in isolation. It adapts to 
existing situations and meets both social 
and spiritual needs of the people. As 
a country with a long history, religion 
in India developed by interacting with 

various traditions. Vedic religion, 
which came with the advent of Aryan-
speaking peoples to India, absorbed many 

elements from the Indus civilization. 
Mother goddess worship had its origins 
in Harappa. Similarly an image found in 
the Indus script has been identified as 
that of Siva. The prime Vedic gods were 

Indra, Varuna, Agni, etc. and it was only 
later that the worship of Siva and Vishnu 
developed. In the mid-first millennium 
before the Common Era (B.C.) two great 
religions emerged in the Indo-Gangetic 

valley: Buddhism and Jainism (apart from 
other heterodox religions such as Ajivika) 
which challenged the orthodox Vedic 

religious practices. 
Similarly, in the mid-˜rst millennium 
of the Common Era, in the southern country, 

a great religious tradition ˚ourished in the 
form of a devotional or bhakti movement. 
Bhakti as a religious concept means 
devotional surrender to a supreme god for 

attaining salvation. Even though texts such 
as the Bhagavad Gita talk about the path 
of 
bhakti
, or 
bhakti-marga
, the movement 
gained force only in this period. Historians 
argue that this emerged in opposition to 
the ethical, fatalistic and atheistic traditions 
of Jainism and Buddhism. Vedic theism 
incorporated certain features from both. 

While Adi Sankara provided Hinduism 
with a philosophic doctrine of Advaita to 
counter the heterodox religions it remained 
at the intellectual level. It was the great Saiva 
Nayanmar and Azhwars, with their moving 

verses, gave form to the Bhakti doctrine and 
Cultural Syncretism:  Bhakti Movement in India13Lesson
Learning ObjectivesTo acquire knowledge in
Adi Sankara™s counter to the traditions of Jainism and Buddhism
Religious renaissance and the impact of devotional movement in south India 
Conflicts between Saivism and Vaishnavism 
Conflicts with sramanic sects of Jainism and Buddhism
Trends in bhakti movement of north India, due to the impact of Sufism and the 
influence of Vaishnavite movement in Bengal
Monotheistic movement represented by Kabir, Guru Nanak and Ravidas and the 

reformist approach of the Ramanujar school of thought

18won the support of the people. Historians 
refer to this as the Bhakti movement. ˛is 
movement, supported by the ruling kings, 
made a deep and lasting impact on all aspects: 
social, political, religious, cultural and 
linguistic. ˛us south India became the home 
of religious renaissance from the 7
th to the 10
th century. With theologians like Ramanujar it 
turned into a philosophical and ideological 
movement in the eleventh century. Inspired 
by many poet-saints the bhakti cult became 
widespread from 14
th century in the whole of 
India. We analyze here the general features of 
the bhakti movement, its main proponents, 
the two di˝erent trends of the movement and 
its impact on social and cultural life of the 
people. 
13.1  
Bhakti Movement in the SouthThe transformation of a 

tribal society into a well-
structured social order 
and the emergence of a 
powerful monarchical 
system of governance 

necessitated patronizing 
one religion or the other to legitimize 
authority. Buddhism and Jainism were 

predominantly patronized by the merchant 
class and they were also supported by the 
state. The Bhakti movement originated 
among the landholding castes, and it was 
critical of Buddhists and Jains. This also 

led to a fight for royal patronage. 
Sources: The bhakti literature, mostly 

puranas and hagiographical texts, provide 
information about the religious conflicts 
in Tamilnadu. Thevaram consists of 
the hymns by the three Nayanmars: 
Appar (Thirunavukkarasar), Sambandar 

(Thirugnanasambandar) and Sundarar. 
Together these constitute the seven of 
the twelve Saiva Thirumurais. The Eighth 

Thirumurai consists of the hymns of 
Manickavasakar. Many of these hymns 
articulate their criticism of Jainism and 
Buddhism. Periyapuranam by Sekkizhar 

which narrates the stories of the sixty-
three Nayanmars is an important source 
for the study of the Bhakti movement. 
The hymns of the Vaishnava saints, 
Azhwars, are compiled as Nalayira Divya 

Prabandham. The importance of the 
bhakti poems lie in the fact that they are 
still read, sung and revered by people, and 

they also form an important part of Tamil 
literary tradition. Epigraphical sources 
and iconography also provide much 
information.
The earliest instances of conflict between 
Saivism and Vaishnavism on the one hand 
and the Sramanic sects of Buddhism and 
Jainism on the other hand occurred during 
the Pallava period.
Mahendravarma Pallava I, a Jain 
by faith, persecuted those belonging to 
other religions. Appar, a Jaina in his early 

life, called Darmasena, later turned to 
Saivism under the influence of his sister. 
Mahendravarma at the instance of his 

Jaina advisers tried to reconvert Appar first 
by persuasion and then by persecution. 

But eventually it ended in the king™s own 
conversion to Saivism. 
According to tradition, Sambandar 
defeated the Jains in a theological debate 
and consequently his opponents were 
impaled. Maravarman Arikesari (640-

670), also known as Koon Pandyan, who 
converted from Saivism to Jainism, was 
later re-converted under the influence of 

Sambandar. According to a Saivite legend, 
after his re-conversion, he ordered a 
massacre of Jains in Samantham, a village 
in Madurai district. 

19on killing of animals may be traced to 
this influence. The supremacy accorded 
to the Tamil language was a response to 
the fact that the heterodox religions used 
north India Prakrits. Most importantly, 
bhakti exponents posited that, unlike 

the fatalistic religions of Buddhism and 
Jainism, devotion to Vishnu and Siva 
could overcome fate. 
Thus Vedic Hinduism was 
transformed by the conflict with Buddhism 

and Jainism.
13.2  
Spread of Bhakti Movement to the NorthWhen the popularity of the bhakti 
movement in south India reached its peak, 
the doctrine of bhakti was expounded 
at the philosophical level by a series of 
Vaishnava scholars and saints. Ramanujar 
expounded the philosophy known as 

Vishistadvaita, or qualified monism. His 
teaching qualified Adi Sankara™s emphasis 
on absolute monism or the oneness of the 

‚supreme™ and the ‚souls™. 
If the Bhakti movement flourished 
in the Tamil country from the seventh 
century, it was only from the fifteenth 
century that there was an extraordinary 

outburst of devotional poetry in north 
India. The society had degenerated into a 
caste-ridden community with practice of 
segregation, polytheism and idolatry. The 
religious minded saints raised their voice 

of protest against rites and ceremonies, 
superstitions, and unwanted formalisms. 
A popular monotheistic movement along 

with Vaishnava Bhakti movement came to 
be launched. The monotheists followed a 
path which was independent of dominant 
religions of the time, Hinduism and Islam. 
They denied their allegiance to either of 

them and criticized superstitious and 
orthodox elements of both the religions. 
Bhakti literature and hagiographies 
contain copious details about the conflicts 
between Saivism and Vaishanavism 

on the one hand and the heterodox 
sects such as Buddhism and Janinism. 
The philosophical treatises such as the 
Saiva Siddhanta texts contain elaborate 
disputations of Buddhist and Jain 

philosophies. Some of the Saiva Siddhanta 
texts, such as Sivagnana Sithiyar, contain 
a separate section called ‚parapakkam™ 
which essentially refute Buddhist and Jain 
theological arguments. Bhakti literature 

and hagiography narrate instances of 
conflict and the defeat of heterodoxy. 
Inscriptions indicate that such conflict 

was accompanied by violence with the 
impaling of many monks.
Despite the sophisticated 
philosophical disputation, it was the 

nature of the Bhakti movement and the 
royal patronage that it received that 
ultimately led to the downfall of Buddhism 
and Jainism. By the eleventh century, both 

these religions were effectively defeated. 
While Buddhism was wiped out in the 
Tamil country as in much of India Tamil-

speaking Jain communities have survived 
in pockets in Tamilnadu to this day. 
Temples and shrines were destroyed or fell 
into disuse while many artefacts were lost 
due to neglect and vandalism. To this day 

one can see decapitated statues of Buddha 
and the Jain thirthankaras in many parts 
of Tamilnadu.
Despite this, the orthodox and 
heterodox interacted with each other 
and they have left a mark. The idea 
of renunciation, which is central to 
Buddhism and Jainism, was adopted by 

Saivites and Vaishnavites. In response 
to the simplicity and life negation of 
the heterodox sects bhakti movement 
celebrated life with festivals and rituals. 
Similarly, the high value accorded to 

vegetarian food habits and the prohibition 

20for promoting the interest of humanity at 
large. The Sufis were a class of philosophers 
remarkable for their religious catholicity 
and tolarance. Sufis regarded God as the 
supreme beauty and believed that one 
must admire it, take delight in His thought 

and concentrate his attention on Him 
only. They believed that God is ‚Mashuq™ 
(beloved) and Sufis are the ‚Ashiqs™ 

(lovers). Sufism crystallized into various 
‚Silsilahs™ or orders. The most popular 
Sufi orders were Chistis, Suhrawardis, 
Qadiriyahs and Naqshbandis.
Sufism took root in both rural and 
urban areas, and exercised a deep social, 

political and cultural influence on the 
masses. It rebelled against all forms of 
religious formalism, orthodoxy, falsehood 
and hypocrisy, and endeavoured to create 

a new world order in which spiritual 
bliss was the ultimate goal. At a time 
when struggle for political power was the 

prevailing trend, the Sufi saints reminded 
people of their moral obligations. In a 
world torn by strife and conflict they tried 
to bring peace and harmony. The most 
important contribution of Sufism is that it 

helped to blunt the edge of Hindu-Muslim 
conflicts and prejudices by forging the 
feelings of solidarity and brotherhood 
between these two religious communities.
13.4  
Salient Features of Bhakti Movement 1. The bhakti reformers preached the 
principles of monotheism (oneness 
of God)
 2. They believed in freedom from 
the cycle of life and death. They 
advocated that the salvation could be 
attained only by deep devotion and 
faith in God. 
 3. They emphasized the self-surrender 
for obtaining the bliss and grace of 
God.
The advent of Islam with the 
Turkish conquest posed a challenge to 

Vedic scholars and priests. By the end of 
the fourteenth century Islam had spread 
to large parts of India. A considerable 
section of the Indian population had taken 

to Islam. Combined with state power, the 
universal message of Islam with emphasis 
on equality attracted the lower sections of 

society. 
The new political and social 
situation created conditions for the 
growth of non-conformist movements 
with anti-caste, anti-vedic and anti-

puranic traditions. The resultant changes 
in the cultural sphere were: development 
of regional languages, the evolution of 
Hindustani (Hindi), and of Indo-Muslim 

music and architecture. 
The Hindu response to Muslim 
political power was complex. While 
there was considerable hostility to the 

new religion there was also a tendency to 
internal reform to strengthen Hinduism 
so as to face the challenge. An important 
outcome of the encounter was the rise of 
syncretic sects and major poets and Saints 

such as Kabir, Guru Nanak, and Ravidas. 
13.3In parallel with the Bhakti movement in 

Hinduism, Sufism played a similar role 
in Islam. The terms Sufi, Wali, Darvesh 
and Fakir are used for Muslim saints 
who attempted to develop their intuitive 
faculties through ascetic exercises, 

contemplation, renunciation and self-
denial. By the 12
th century, Sufism had 
become an influential aspect of Islamic 

social life as it extended over almost the 
entire Muslim community.
Sufism represents the inward or 
esoteric side and the mystical dimension 

of Islam. Sufi saints transcended religious 
and communal distinctions, and worked 

21of polytheism, idolatry, and caste. He was 
equally unsparing in his condemnation 
of Muslim formalism. He was a true 
seeker after God, and did his best to 
break the barriers that separated Hindus 
from Muslims. What appealed to the 

millions of his followers through the ages, 
however, is his passionate conviction 
that he had found the pathway to God, a 

pathway accessible to the lowest as well 
as the highest. His poetry is still recited 
across large parts of India.
 RavidasRavidas
 was a poet saint 
of the 
bhakti movement 
during the 15th to 16th 
century.
 Venerated 
as a guru (teacher) in 

the regions of Punjab, 

Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Madhya 
Pradesh, the devotional songs of 
Ravidas 
made a lasting impact upon the bhakti 
movement. The life details of Ravidas are 
uncertain and contested. Most scholars 
believe he was born in a family of tanners. 
Ravidas was one of the disciples of the 
bhakti saint-poet Ramananda. Ravidas™ 

devotional songs were included in the 
Sikh Scriptures. Ravidas spoke against 
social divisions of caste and gender, and 
promoted unity in the pursuit of personal 
spiritual freedoms
Guru NanakThe saint with the 

biggest institutional 
influence was Guru 
Nanak (1469Œ1539) 
who founded the Sikh 
religion which shows 

undoubted syncretic 
influence. As a monotheistic religion 
Sikhism emphasized the oneness of god 

and adherence to a strict morality. Over 
two centuries, under the leadership 
 4. Gurus could act as guides and 
preceptors. 
 5. They advocated the principle of 

Universal brotherhood.
 6. They criticized idol worship.
 7. They stressed the singing of hymns 

with deep devotion.
 8. Arguing that all living beings, 

including humans, were god™s 
children they strongly denounced 
caste system which divided people 
according to their birth. 
 9. They condemned ritualism, 
pilgrimages and fasts.
 10. They did not consider any language 

as sacred and composed poems in 
the language of the common people. 
13.5  
Proponents of Bhakti MovementKabirKabir is probably 
the most important 
cultural figure of 
medieval India. His 
iconoclastic poetry 
which ridiculed 

ostentatiousness 
and ritual, and 
emphasized the universality of god 

won many adherents. Little concrete 
historical evidence is available on his life. 
He was probably a weaver. Said to be a 
disciple of Ramananda, he learnt Vedanta 
philosophy from him. According to the 

popular Tazkirah-i-Auliya-i-Hind (Lives 
of Muslim Saints), he was a disciple of 
the Muslim Sufi, Shaikh Taqi. Kabir 
was a religious radical who denounced 
with equal zest the narrowness of 

sectarianism, both Hindu and Islam. His 
message appealed to the lower classes 
of Hindu community. The most salient 

features of his teachings is denunciation 
Kabir
Ravidas
Guru Nanak

22NamadevaNamadeva, a son of a 
tailor and an inhabitant 
of the village of Naras-
Vamani in Satara district 
of Maharashtra, under 
the influence of Saint 

Janadeva, was converted 
to the path of bhakti. 
A staunch devotee of 

Vitthala of Pandarpur, Namdeva spent 
much of his time in worship along with 
his followers, chanting mostly in his 
own verses. He wrote many 
abhangs
 (songs composed and sung by saints in 
Maharashtra in praise of God™s glory) in 
Marathi and Hindi. He travelled as far as 
Punjab where his teachings became so 
popular that they were later absorbed in 
the 
Guru Granth
. Love god with all your 
heart to lead a pious life surrendering 
everything to him with steadfast devotion 
is the essence of his message.
Ramananda (1400-1470)While Chaitanya of 

Bengal belonged to the 
philosophical school 
of Madhavacharya 
(a chief advocate 
of Dvaita school of 

vedhanta)
, Ramananda 
was of Ramanuja™s 

philosophical thought. 

Ramananda was born at Prayag (Allahabad) 
and received his higher education in 
Hindu religious philosophy at Banaras 
and joined the school of Ramanuja as 
a preacher. He visited the holy places of 

North India and preached Vaishnavism. 
Ramananda introduced radical changes 
in Vaishnavism by founding his own sect 
based on the doctrine of love and devotion 
to Rama and Sita. He preached equality 

before God. He rejected caste system, 
of its ten gurus, Sikhism expanded 

swiftly in the Punjab region winning 
numerous adherents. Sikh teachings 
resulted in the creation of a strong sense 
of community. The politics of the times 
created conflicts with the Mughal empire 

leading to persecution which resulted in 
the martyrdom of its gurus. Guru Govind 
Singh was the last guru. After him the 
Granth Sahib was considered the guru. 
While the teachings of Guru Nank is the 

Adi Granth. The Guru Granth Sahib, part 
from the teachings of its other gurus, 
incorporates the writings of many Bhakti 

poets and Sufi saints such as Ramananda, 
Namadeva, Kabir and Sheikh Farid. 
Chaitanya (1485Œ1533)Chaitanya of Bengal 
represents an aspect of 
the bhakti movement 
that is very different 
from that seen in the 
lives and teachings 

of Kabir and his 
successors. Chaitanya™s 
concern, unlike that 

of Kabir, was not with 
bringing people to 
an understanding of a God, beyond all 
creeds and formulations; it was to exalt 
the superiority of Krishna over all other 

deities. It was, in other words, a revivalist, 
not a syncretic movement, a return to 
a worship of Vishnu under one of his 
most appealing forms, the loving ecstatic 
Krishna. 
The Bengal Vaishnavites did 
not try to reform Hinduism. Instead, 

they emphasized devotion to Krishna. 

Chaitanya, however, made disciples from 
all classes. He popularised the practice of 
group devotional singing accompanied by 
ecstatic dancing. His movement became 
popular in Bengal and Orissa. 
Chaitanya
Namadeva
Ramananda

23and moving 
poems, Hindi 
poems about Lord 
Krishna. Krishna™s 
bal lila
 constitutes 
the first great 
theme of Sur Das 
poetry. According 
to him, love is a 

sublimated theme 
representing 
the irresistible 
attraction of the 
gopis 
of Brindavan 
towards Krishna. The intensity of passion 
displayed by the 
gopis 
is an expression 
of the natural attraction of the human 

spirit towards the divine soul. His popular 
works are Sur Sagar, Sur Saravali and 
Sahitya Lehari. His monumental work 

Sur Sagar or Sur™s Ocean is a story of Lord 
Krishna from the birth to the departure 
for Mathura. 
Tuka Ram Tuka Ram was 

born in 1608 in a 
village near Poona, 
Maharashtra. He was 
a contemporary of 
Maratha Shivaji and saints like Eknath 

and Ramdas. After his early life as a trader 
he started spending his time singing 
devotional songs in praise of his favourite 

deity Lord Vithoba of Pandarpur.
Tuka Ram believed in a formless 
God. According to him, it was not possible to 
enjoin spiritual joy with worldly activities. 
He stressed the all-pervasiveness of God. 

He rejected Vedic sacrifices, ceremonies, 
pilgrimages, idol worship, etc. He also 
preached the virtue of piety, forgiveness 
and peace of mind. He spread the message 
of equality and brotherhood. He tried to 

foster Hindu-Muslim Unity. Some of his 
verses are devoted to this theme. He wrote 
his 
abhangas 
in Marathi
particularly the supremacy of Brahmins 

as the sole custodians of Hindu religion. 
The people from the lower strata of the 
society became his followers. His twelve 

disciples included Ravidas, Kabir and 
two women. Ramananda was the first to 
preach his doctrine of devotion in Hindi, 
the vernacular language. It gained him a 
good deal of popularity among the people 

of all classes. His followers were divided 
into conservative and radical schools. 
Mirabai (1498-1546)Mirabai was born in Kudh of Merta 
district of Rajasthan. She was the great 
granddaughter of Rana Jodhaji, founder 
of Jodhpur. She was married to Bhoj Raj, 
son of Rana Sanga of Mewar. She became 
a devotee of Lord Krishna, left the palace 

and began singing her songs (bhajans) 
and preaching the path of love on God. 
Mirabai preached the 

worship of God in the 
name of Krishna and 
stressed that no one 
should be deprived of 
His divine grace on 

the ground of birth, 
poverty, age and sex. 
Her devotional songs 
and lyrics constitute a 
rich cultural heritage. Her 
bhajans 
are sung 
with fervour to this day. Her teachings 
carried the message of divine worship to 
almost every Hindu household.
Sur Das Sur Das lived at the court of Akbar and 

was popularly known as the blind bard 
of Agra. Sur Das is believed to have been 
a disciple of Vallabacharya who was 
a Vaishnava preacher in the Sultanate 
period. Vallabhacharya was the founder 

of Pushtimarga (way of grace). Sur Das 
preached religion of love and devotion 
to a personal God. He wrote inspiring 
Mirabai
Sur Das
Tuka Ram

2413.6  
Impact of the Bhakti Movement Salvation which was previously 
considered attainable only by people 
of the first three orders in the social 
hierarchy became available to everyone. 
Bhakti movement provided women and 
members of the lower strata of the society 

an inclusive path to spiritual salvation. 
Literature on devotional songs in regional 
languages became profuse. The poet-

saints of this movement championed a 
wide range of philosophical positions, 

ranging from theistic dualism of Dvaita 
to absolute monism of Advaita. Much of 
the regional practices such as community 
singing, chanting together of deity 
names, conducting festivals, going on 

pilgrimages, performing rituals relating to 
Saivism, and Vaishnavism have survived 
to this day. 
SUMMARYThe protest and resistance of Jains and Buddhists to the authority of Orthodox 

Vedic religion by making religion accessible to all without caste or gender bias is 
dealt with
The persecution of Jains and Buddhists by Saivites with royal patronage is discussed
The transformation of Vedic religion while conflicting with Jainism and Buddhism 
is explained
The spread of bhakti cult to north India and its salient features are examined
Impact of Sufism on Islam and its influence in the evolution of a monotheistic 

religion especially Sikhism are analyzed
The major proponents of bhakti movement and the impact of their work in the 

north India are highlighted
EXERCISES I. Choose the correct answer
 1. ________ provided Hinduism with a philosophic doctrine of Advaita.
 a) Adi Sankara
 b) Ramanuja
 c) Ramananda
 d) Chaitanya
 2. _______ refers to the conflict between the orthodox Vedic sects and Shramanic sects.
 a) Ramayana
 b) Bagavatha purana
 c) Hagiographies
 d) Bal lila
 3. _______ was known as Koon Pandyan.
 a) Mahendravarman I 
 b) Maravarman Arikesari
 c) Narasimhavarman
 d) Sundara Pandyan
 4. Appar as a Jaina was known as _________
 a) Harisena
 b) ˛eerthankara
 c) Sivagnana Sithiyar
 d) Dharmasena
 5. Fakir is the term used for----------------
 a) Muslim saint
 b) Buddhist
 c) Hindu ascetic
 d) Sikh guru

25 6. Madhavacharya belonged to the philosophical school of ______________
 a) Dwaita 
  b) Advaita
 c) Visistadvaita
 d) Pushti marga
 7. _______ was one of the disciples of the Bhakti saint-poet Ramananda.
 a) Chaitanya 
 b) Ravidas
 c) Guru Nanak
 d) Kabir
 8. _______ was the first to preach his doctrine of devotion in Hindi.
 a) Ravidas
 b) Ramananda
 c) Kabir
 d) Namadev
 9. _______ was known as ‚the blind bard of Agra™ at the court of Akbar.
 a) Surdas 
 b) Tukaram
 c) Ramananda
 d) Mirabai
 10. _______ was the contemporary of the Maratha ruler Shivaji.
 a) Ramananda
 b) Mirabai
 c) Surdas
 d) Tukaram
 II. (A) Find out the correct statement
 1. Appar, a Saiva in his early life, later persuaded by his sister, turned to Jainism.
 2. Sufis regarded god as the supreme beauty.
 3. The Bengal Vaishnavites tried to reform Hinduism by promoting Ram bhakti.
 4. Devotional songs of Ravidas were included in the Buddhist Scriptures.
 (B) Assertion (A):
 The bhakti reformers preached the principle of monotheism.
  Reason (R):
 They criticized idol worship
  a) A is correct, R is not the correct explanation of A
  b) A and R are wrong 
  c) A is correct, R is the correct explanation of A
  d) A is wrong, R is correct
 III Match the following
  1. Kabir
 - Sahitya Lehari
  2. Sur Das
 - Shaik Taqi
  3. Sufism
 - Sambandar
  4. Koon Pandyan
 - Weaver
  a) 2, 3, 4, 1 b) 4, 3, 2, 1 c) 2, 4, 3, 1 d) 3, 4, 2, 1 IV Give your answers briefly
 1. Highlight the services rendered by Ramanujar for Bhakti cult ?
 2. What do you know about the contribution of Ravidas to the Bhakti movement?
 3. What were Ramananda™s teachings?
 4. Mirabai™s songs and lyrics constitute a rich cultural heritage - Explain.
 5. What were the two different attitudes of the Hindu saints towards Islam?

26 V Write a short note on the following
 1. South India became the home of religious renaissance. Explain.
 2. Analyse the teachings of (a) Sur Das (b) Tuka Ram.
 3. Kabir™s teachings.
 4. How did Chaitanya differ from Kabir?
 5. Point out the impact of the Bhakti Movement.
 VI Answer in detail
 1. Explain the impact of Sufism.
 2. List out the salient features of the Bhakti Movement.
 VII Activities
 1. Prepare a biographical sketch of Kabir.
 2. Highlight the impact of Bhakti Movement on music and art.
 VII Assignments
 1. Prepare an album by collecting pictures of Bhakti Saints.
 2. Visit 
some of the birth places of Bhakti saints in Tamilnadu and collect the details 
of sthalapuranas of temples they served.
GLOSSARYSyncretism Amalgamation of different religious and culturesHagiographical

about the lives of saints
IntuitiveFeeling to be true even without 

conscious reasoningBard Poet
SublimatePurify
PervasivenessPresence felt throughout a 
place or thingEcstaticJoyful, blissful

27  REFERENCES 1. S. Krishnasawamy Aiyangar, 
Some Contributions of South India to Indian Culture
, University of Calcutta, 1923.
 2. R. Champakalakshmi, 
Religion, Tradition and Ideology
, Oxford University Press, 
2011. 3. Noboru Karashima, 
A Concise History of South India
, Oxford University Press, 2014.
 4. S.A.A. Rizvi, 
Wonder That Was India II,
 Picador India, 2005.
TIME LINE  (AD/CE)Birth of Ramananda
1400Birth of Guru Nanak
1469Birth of Chaitanya
1485Birth of Mirabai
1498Birth  of  Tukaram
1608
28Pictures are indicative only
* if browser requires allow Flash Player or Java Script.
CULTURAL SYNCRETISM:  BHAKTI MOVEMENT IN INDIA
Let us know the Social 
and Religious Movements 
through questions and 
answers.
Procedure Step 1:
 Use the URL or scan the QR code to open the activity page.
Step 2:
 On ﬁSocial Reforms and Religious Movementsﬂ activity page. 
  The questions are given in the form of objective types. Select
  the answer for that.
Step 3:
 If the answers are correct, the green hand symbol will appear
  on the right. 
Step 4:
  If the answer is wrong, click ‚Show answer™ to know the correct
  answer.
URL:https://civilserviceaspirants.in/gk/History/Social-reforms-and-religious-
movements-1.html
http://www.gyanjosh.com/test/modern-india/socio-religious-movements/0
ICT CORNER
Step4
Step3
Step2
Step1

29IntroductionIndia had been invaded from the west/
north-west several times over the 
centuries, beginning with Alexander. 
Various parts of north India had been 
ruled by foreigners like the Indo-Greeks, 
Sakas, Kushans and Afghans. The Mughals, 

descended from the Mongol Chengiz 
Khan and the Turk Timur, founded an 
empire in India which lasted for more 

than three centuries. But we remember 
them not as rulers of foreign origin, but 
as an indigenous, Indian dynasty. Babur 
was the founder of the Mughal empire 
which was established in 1526 after Babur 

defeated Ibrahim Lodi in the battle of 
Panipat. Thus a new epoch and a new 
empire in India began, lasting for nearly 
three centuries beginning from 1526 to 
1857. Six major rulers of this dynasty, 
Babur, Humayun, Akbar, Jahangir, Shah 

Jahan and Aurangzeb, known as the 
ﬁGreat Mughalsﬂ, left their mark on Indian 
history. The empire declined after the 
death of Aurangzeb in 1707. The empire 
formally ended a century and a half later, 

when power passed to the British crown 
after the great revolt of 1857. 
At the height of its power 
the Mughal˜empire stretched from 
Afghanistan to Bengal and from 

Kashmir down to the Tamil region in the 
south.  Mughal rule created a uniform, 
centralized administration over the entire 
The Mughal Empire14Lesson
Learning ObjectivesTo acquaint oneself with
Foundation of Mughal rule in India
Humayun™s inability to sustain his rule leading to the establishment of Sur 

dynasty under Sher Shah
Sher Shah™s administrative reforms
Consolidation of Mughal rule during the reign of Akbar
Akbar™s Religious and Rajput policy
Significance of Jahangir™s rule
Shah Jahan™s contribution to art and architecture
Aurangzeb™s military conquests and his ruinous Rajput and Deccan policies and 

his wars against the Marathas
India during Mughal rule: Development of literature, painting, music, 

architecture; Bhakti Movement, Sufism Sikhism, spread of Christianity and 
Islam, trade, commerce, industry, science and technology

30country. The Mughals, especially Akbar, 
created a polity integrating Hindus and 
Muslims into a unified nation, forging a 
composite national identity. In addition, 
the Mughals left behind a heritage of great 
architecture, literature and art which has 
enriched India.  
14.1  
Zahiruddin Muhammad 
Babur (1526Œ1530)The race for political supremacy in 

Central Asia amongst the Uzbeks (Turkic 
ethnic group), the Safavids (the members 
of the dynasty that ruled Iran patronising 
Shia Islam) and the Ottomans (Turkish 
people practicing Sunni Islam) forced 

Zahiruddin Muhammad Babur, the 
ruler of Samarkand, to seek his career 
prospects elsewhere. Historically the trade 

conducted by countries of Central Asia 
through the Silk Route with India had 
provided the required knowledge about 
the country (India) they were interested 
in. Babur who dreamed of repeating what 

Timur had done a century and a quarter 
earlier, succeeded in founding the Mughal 
kingdom with Delhi as its capital in 1526 
in the wake of the political disintegration 
of the Delhi Sultanate. 
Babur
Babur, a boy of eleven, inherited the 

throne of Samarkand (now a city in 
Uzbekistan) from his father. As there 
were enemies all round him, he lost 
his throne but soon reclaimed it. But 
soon he realized that, with the˜powerful 

Safavid dynasty˜in Iran and the Uzbeks 
in Central Asia, he should rather turn to 
the southeast towards India to build an 

empire of his own. As a Timurid, B˚bur 
had an eye on the˜Punjab, part of which 
had been Timur™s possession. Between 
1519 and 1524 when he invaded Bhera, 
Sialkot and Lahore, he showed his definite 

intention to conquer Hindustan, where 
the political scene also favoured his 
adventure. After conquering Kabul and 
Ghazni, Babur crossed the Indus to India 
and established a small kingdom. The 

time for invading India was also ripe as 
there was discontent among the Afghans 
and the Rajputs, as Sultan Ibrahim Lodi 

of the Lodi dynasty was trying to expand 
his territory. Babur received an embassy 
from Daulat Khan Lodi, a principal 
opponent of Ibrahim Lodi, and Rana 
Sangha, ruler of Mewar and the chief of 

Rajput Confederacy, with a plea to invade 
India. When Babur marched to India he 
first defeated the forces of Daulat Khan 
Lodi at Lahore as he had gone back on his 
promise to help Babur.
First Battle of Panipat,  21 April 1526Babur then turned towards the Lodi-

governed Punjab. After several invasions, 
he defeated the formidable forces of 
Ibrahim Lodi with a numerically inferior 
army at Panipat. Babur won this battle 
with the help of strategic positioning of 

his forces and the effective use of artillery. 
Babur™s victory provided hopes for him 
to settle in India permanently. Babur had 

conquered Delhi and Agra, but he still had 
to suppress the Rajputs and the Afghans.

31danger Babar marched against them. In 
the battle that ensued along the banks 
of Ghagra, a tributary of Ganges, Babur 
defeated the Afghans. But he died on his 
way from Agra to Lahore in 1530 
˛ere is a story about Babur™s death. His 
son Humayun was ill and Babur in his love 
for him is said to have prayed, o˝ering 

his own life if his son got well. Humayun 

recovered.
Estimate of BaburBabur, the founder of Mughal Empire, was 
a scholar of Persian and Arabic. Babur™s 
memoirs 
Tuziuk-i-Baburi (Baburnama)
 is 
considered a world classic. Babur found 

nothing admirable either in the Afghans 
who ruled India for some time or in the 

majority of the people they governed. But 
his description of India is delightful. 
What Hindustan possessed, in 
Babur™s view, is described as follows: ‚The 

chief excellence of Hindustan is that it 
is a large country and has abundance of 
gold and silver. Another convenience of 
Hindustan is that the workmen of every 

profession and trade are innumerable and 
without end.™
Babur™s dominions were now 
secure from Kandah˚r to the borders of 
Bengal. However, in the great area that 

marked the Rajput desert and the forts 
of Ranthambhor,˜Gwalior and Chanderi, 
there was no settled administration, as 

the Rajput chiefs were quarrelling among 
themselves. So Babur left a difficult task 
for his son Humayun. 
14.2  
Humayun (1530-1540 
& 1555-1556)Humayun, a cultured and learned person, 

was not a soldier like his father. He was 
faced with the problems of a weak financial 
Artillery is an army unit that uses large 
cannon-like weapons, transportable 
and usually operated by more than one 

person. Gun powder was ˙rst invented by 

the Chinese and found its way to Europe 

in the 13
th century A.D. (CE). It was 
used in guns and cannons from the mid-
fourteenth century onwards. In India we 
have no instances of artillery being used in 
war before Babur.
Battle of Khanwa, 1527Babur decided to take on Rana Sanga 
of Chittor, who as ruler of Mewar, 
had a strong influence over Rajasthan 
and Malwa. Babur selected Khanwa, 
near Agra, as a favourable site for this 
inevitable encounter. The ferocious 

march of Rana Sanga with a formidable 
force strengthened by Afghan Muslims, 
Mahmud Lodi, brother of Ibrahim 

Lodi, and Hasan Khan Mewati, ruler of 
Mewat, confronted the forces of Babur. 
With strategic positioning of forces and 
effective use of artillery, Babur defeated 
Rana Sanga™s forces. This victory was 

followed by the capture of forts at Gwalior 
and Dholpur which further strengthened 
Babur™s position.
Battle of Chanderi, 1528The next significant battle that ensured 

Babur™s supremacy over the Malwa 
region was fought against Medini Rai at 
Chanderi. Following this victory Babur 
turned towards the growing rebellious 
activities of Afghans. 
Battle of Ghagra, 1529This was the last battle Babar fought 

against the Afghans. Sultan Ibrahim 
Lodi™s brother Mahmud Lodi and Sultan 
Nusrat Shah, son-in-law of Ibrahim Lodi, 
conspired against Babur. Realising the 

32After capturing Chunar Humayun 
marched to Bengal to confront Sher Khan. 
When Humayun reached Gaur or Gauda 
he received information on the rebellion 
of Hindal, his younger brother. Humayun 
proceeded to Agra to quell the rebellion. 

Sher Khan who had been quiet all this time 
started attacking the army of Humayun. 
When Humayun reached Chausa with 

great difficulty there was a full-fledged 
battle. 
Battle of Chausa (1539)This battle was won by Sher Khan due to 
his superior political and military skills. 
Humayun suffered a defeat in which 7000 
Mughal nobles and soldiers were killed 
and Humayun himself had to flee for 
his life by swimming across the Ganga. 

Humayun who had arrived at Agra 
assembled his army with the support 
of his brothers Askari and Hindal to 

counter Sher Khan.  The final encounter 
took place at Kanauj.
Battle of Kanauj (1540)This battle was won by Sher Khan and  
Humayun™s army was completely routed, 
and he became a prince without a 
kingdom. 
14.3  
Sher Shah 
 and Sur DynastyFrom the time Humayun abandoned 

the throne in the Battle of Kanauj to his 
regaining of power in 1555 Delhi was 
ruled by Sher Shah of the Sur Dynasty. 
Born in the family of a Jagirdar and 
named as Farid, he received the title of 

Sher Khan after killing a tiger (sher in 
Hindi). When he ascended the throne, he 
was called Sher Shah. Through his ability 

and efficiency, he emerged as the chief of 
Afghans in India. His military capability 
system and the predatory Afghans. 
Bahadur Shah, the ruler of Gujarat, also 

posed a great threat. Humayun™s brother 
Kamran who was in-charge of Kabul 
and Kandahar extended his authority up 

to Punjab. Humayun remembering the 
promise he had made to his father on 
the eve of his death that he would treat 
his brothers kindly, agreed to Kamran™s 
suzerainty over Punjab to avoid a civil 

war. 
The growth of Afghan power in the 
regions around Bihar and Uttar Pradesh 
under the leadership of Sher Khan (later 
Sher Shah) made Humayun to initiate 

action.  Defeating the Afghans at Daurah 
in 1532 Humayun besieged the powerful 

fort of Chunar. After a period of four 
months, Humayun, believing the word of 
Sher Shah that he would be loyal to the 
Mughals, withdrew the siege. This turned 

out to be a great mistake. 
Humayun spent the succeeding 
years of his life in constructing a new city 
in Delhi, Dinpanah, while his enemies 
were strengthening themselves. Realising 
the ensuing danger from Bahadur Shah 
who had annexed Rajasthan and instigated 

and provided refuge to all anti-Mughal 
elements, Humayan marched against 
him. He captured Gujarat and Malwa and 

left them under the control of his brother 
Askari. Unable to put down the rebellions 

of the Gujarati people, Askari decided to 
proceed to Agra. This alarmed Humayun 
stationed at Mandu, for he was afraid 
that Askari would take Agra for himself. 
Hence, abandoning Gujarat and Malwa 
Humayun pursued his brother. Both the 

brothers reconciled after a meeting at 
Rajasthan. 
When Humayun was deeply 
engrossed in the affairs of Bahadur Shah, 

Sher Khan had strengthened himself by 
defeating the ruler of Bengal. Sher Khan 
captured the fort of Rohtas and Bengal. 

33up a strong administrative system. So he 
made his government highly centralised. 
The local administrative structure of 
the Delhi Sultanate was followed with 
certain changes. The village headmen 
who were made responsible for the 

goods stolen within the area under their 
control became vigilant. The welfare of 
the peasants was a prime concern. When 

the peasant is ruined, Sher Shah believed, 
the king is ruined. Sher Shah took great 
care that the movements of the army did 
not damage crops. He followed a flexible 
revenue system. Land was surveyed and 

revenue settled according to the fertility 
of the soil. In some areas, the jagirdari 
and zamindari systems were allowed to 
continue. In yet other places he arranged 
to collect only a portion of the gross 

produce. 
JagirdariIt is a land tenure system developed during 
the Delhi Sultanate. Under the system the 

collection of the revenue of an estate and 

the power of governing it were bestowed 

upon an oˆcial of the state.
ZamindariThe term refers to another land tenure 
system. The word zamindar means 
landowner in Persian. In Mughal times 

the zamindars were drawn from the 

class of nobles. Akbar granted land to 

the nobles as well as to the descendents 

of old ruling families and allowed them 

to enjoy it hereditarily. Zamindars 

collected revenue from the tenants and 

cultivators and remitted a fixed amount 

to the state.
Sher Shah showed the same concern 
while dealing with traders. In order to 
encourage trade, he simplified trade 
and diplomacy made him victorious over 

Humayun and many other Rajput rulers. 

Malwa fell without a fight. Rana Uday 
Singh of Mewar surrendered without 
resistance. Sher Shah™s next venture to 

capture Kalinjar failed as a gunshot 
caused his death in 1545. Sher Shah 
was succeeded by his second son Islam 
Shah who ruled till 1553. His death at 
a young age led to a state of confusion 

about succession. Humayun used this 
opportunity to regain Delhi and Agra 
from the Sur rulers.
Sher Shah
Sher Shah™s ReformsWhen Sher Shah was pursuing Humayun, 

he had left Khizr Khan as the Governor 
of Bengal. Khizr Khan married the 
daughter of the former ruler of Bengal, 
Sultan Mahmud, and started behaving 
like a king. On his return Sher Shah 

ordered him to be put in chains. As one 
familiar with the problem of provincial 
insubordination, he thought that the real 

solution to the problem would be to set 

3414.4  
Humayun™s Return 
from ExileAˇer Sher Shah™s death in 1545 his weak 
successors ruled for ten years. Humayun,who 
had ˘ed aˇer his defeat at Kanauj, had 
taken asylum in Persia. Humayun then 
went to Afghanistan with Persian troops. 
He succeeded in capturing Kandahar and 

Kabul. But his brother Kamran did not allow 
him to hold them in peace.  ˛e struggle 
between the brothers intensi˙ed, and yet in 

the end Kamran had to seek a compromise 
with Humayun. Meanwhile the Sur empire 
had fragmented, and so Humayun™s invasion 
became easy. ˛e Afghan forces in Punjab, 
on the approach of Mughals, began to ˘ee. 

Humayun became the Emperor once again. 
He died very soon aˇer regaining Delhi when 
he slipped down the stairs of the library in the 
fort at Delhi. In the colourful words of Lane 
Poole, ﬁHumayun stumbled out of his life, as 

he has stumbled through it.ﬂ
Humayun™s Tomb
14.5  
Emperor Akbar 
 (1556Œ1605)During Humayun™s 

wanderings in the 
Rajputana desert, his 
wife gave birth to a son, 
Jalaluddin, known as 
Akbar, in 1542. Akbar 

was crowned at the age of fourteen. At the 
time of Akbar™s ascension, the Afghans 
imposts, collecting taxes only at the 

point of entry and the point of sale. The 
standardization of the metal content 

of gold, silver and copper coins also 
facilitated trade. His currency system 
continued through the entire Mughal 
period and became the basis of the 
coinage under the British. 
For enhancement of trade and 
commerce Sher Shah maintained a robust 
highway system by repairing old roads 
and laying down new roads. Apart from 

repairing the Grand Trunk road from 
the Indus in the west to Sonargaon in 
Bengal, he also built a road connecting 
Gujarat™s seaports with Agra and Jodhpur. 
A road was laid connecting Lahore with 

Multan. The highways were endowed 
with a large network of 
sarais
, rest houses, 
where the traders were provided with 
food and accommodation, ensuring brisk 
commerce. Some of the sarais constructed 
by Sher Shah still survive. These sarais 
also ensured the growth of towns in their 
vicinity.
Sher Shah practiced charity on a 
large scale. He gave stipends from the 
treasury to destitute people. Sher Shah 
was an orthodox and devout Sunni. He 

is said to have dispensed justice without 
bias, punishing the oppressors even if 
they were nobles or his relatives.  Through 
stern punishments to rebellious zamindars 
and nobles and to thieves and robbers he 

ensured effective maintenance of law and 
order in the empire. 
The fiscal administration for which 
Akbar and Todar Mal have been so highly 
praised was largely based on the methods 
of Sher Shah.  During his short rule, Sher 
Shah did not have much time for building 
new cities and palaces. He started building 
a new walled city in Delhi, which later 

came to be known as Purana Qila (Old 
Fort). He built his own mausoleum in 
Sasaram. 

35the Mughals.  Encouraged by the king, 
Hemu first took Gwalior, expelling the 
Mughal governor. Then he marched 
on Agra and captured it without any 
resistance. Hemu™s generosity helped him 
to overcome potential enemies when he 

took Delhi. In November 1556 Akbar 
marched towards Delhi to meet the forces 
of Hemu in the Second Battle of Panipat. 

An arrow struck the eye of Hemu when 
the battle was likely to end in his favour. 
The leaderless Afghan army became 
demoralised and the Mughal forces 
emerged victorious. Hemu was captured 

and executed. This victory made Akbar 
the sovereign of Agra and Delhi and 
 re-establish the Mughal empire.
Akbar and Bairam KhanAs a conqueror Akbar triumphed all over 
North India. ˛e ˙rst four years of Akbar™s 
rule saw the expansion of the Mughal 
empire from Kabul to Jaunpur, including 
Gwalior and Ajmer, under his regent Bairam 
Khan. Soon Bairam Khan began to behave 

haughtily towards his fellow nobles. Akbar, 
enraged by his behaviour issued a 
farman
 dismissing Bairam Khan. ˛is led to Bairam 
Khan™s revolt which was ably dealt with 
by Akbar.  Bairam Khan, ˙nally agreeing 
to submit himself to Akbar, proceeded to 
Mecca. But on his way he was murdered by 
an Afghan. ˛e family of Bairam khan was 

brought to Delhi and his son Abdur Rahim 
became one of the luminaries of Akbar™s 
court with the title Khan-e-Khanan.
Akbar™s Military ConquestsAkbar laid the foundation for a great 

empire through his vast conquests. 
Malwa was conquered in 1562 from Baz 
Bahadur who was made a mansabdar 
in Akbar™s court. The Gondwana region 
of central India was annexed after a 

fierce battle with Rani Durgavati and 
her son Vir Narayan in 1564.The ruler 
and Rajputs were still powerful and posed 

a great challenge. Yet he had a guardian 
and protector in Bairam Khan.
Akbar (Museum of Arts, Los Angeles)
Second Battle of PanipatHemu, the Hindu general of the displaced 

Afghan king Adil Shah, successor of 
Sher Shah, induced the king to permit 
him to lead the Afghan army against 
The defeat of Hemu

36After subordinating the regions of 
central India, Akbar turned his attention 
to Gujarat, a wealthy province renowned 
for its maritime commerce. Akbar 
conquered Gujarat from Muzaffar Shah 
in 1573. Gujarat became a launch pad for 

the annexation of Deccan. After defeating 
Daud Khan, the Afghan ruler of Bihar and 
Bengal, both the provinces were annexed 

to the Mughal empire in 1576. 
Akbar defeated Mirza Hakim of 
Kabul with the help of Raja Man Singh and 

Bhagwan Das. His conquest of Kashmir 
(1586) and Sindh (1591) consolidated the 
of Mewar, Rana Udai Singh, put up a 
great fight before losing Chittor, which 
was conquered by Akbar after a siege of 
six months. Rana Udai Singh retreated 
to the hills. Yet his generals Jaimal and 
Patta carried on their fight. Finally, the 

generals, along with 30,000 Rajputs were 
killed. Out of admiration for the gallant 
Jaimal and Patta. Akbar honoured them by 

erecting statues to their memory outside 
the chief gate of Agra fort. The capture of 
Chittor was followed by the surrender of 
Rajput states like Ranthambhor, Kalinjar, 
Bikaner, Jodhpur and Jaisalmer.
Map not to scaleNSWELakshadweep islands(INDIA)Andaman and nicobar islands(INDIA)BAY OFBENGALARABIANSEAINDIAN OCEANKabulMultanDelhi AjmerAgra
Malwa
Gujarat
KhandeshGondwanaOrissaBengalBiharLucknowGolkondaBidarAllahabadBerar
AhmadnagarBijapurCalicutMadurai
NelloreGoaDiu KandaharLahorePanipatPatnaPolygarsKashmirMUGHAL EMPIREUNDER AKBAR
37secured the services of great warriors 
and administrators for the empire. Raja 
Todar Mal, an expert in revenue affairs, 
rose to the position of Diwan. Birbal was a 
favourite companion of Akbar. 
Mewar and Marwar  were the two 
Rajput kingdoms that defied the Mughal 

Empire. After the death of Rana Udai 
Singh, his son Rana Pratap Singh refused 

to acknowledge Akbar™s suzerainty and 
continued to fight the Mughals till his 
death in 1597. The Battle of Haldighati in 
1576 was the last pitched battle between 
the Mughal forces and Rana Pratap 

Singh. In Marwar (Jodhpur), the ruler 
Chandra Sen, son of Maldeo Rathore, 
resisted the Mughals till his death in 1581, 
though his brothers fought on the side 
of the Mughals. Udai Singh, the brother 

of Chandra Sen was made the ruler of 
Jodhpur by Akbar. Akbar™s capital was at 
Agra in the beginning. Later he built a new 

city at Fatehpur Sikri. Though a deserted 
city now, it still stands with its beautiful 
mosque and great Buland Darwaza and 
many other buildings. 
Jodha Akbar
Mansabdari SystemAkbar provided a systematic and 
centralised system of administration 
which contributed to the success of the 
empire. He introduced the Mansabdari 
system. The nobles, civil and military 
empire in the northwest. After achieving 
the political integration of North India 
Akbar turned his attention to the Deccan. 
Akbar™s forces had occupied Khandesh 

region in 1591. In 1596 Berar was acquired 
from Chand Bibi, who, as the regent of her 
nephew Muzaffar Shah, the Nizam Shahi 
ruler of Ahmednagar, valiantly defended 
Ahmednagar against the Mughal forces of 

Akbar. By 1600 parts of Ahmed Nagar had 
fallen into the hands of Mughal forces. 
Akbar fell sick in September 1604 and 

died on 27 October 1605.   
Rajput PolicyAkbar took earnest e˝orts to win the goodwill 

of the Hindus. He abolished the 
jizya
 (poll 
tax) on non-Muslims and the tax on Hindu 

pilgrims. ˛e practice of 
sati
 by Hindu 
widows was also abolished. ˛e practice 

of making slaves of war prisoners was also 

discontinued. His conciliatory Rajput policy 
included matrimonial alliances with Rajput 
princely families, and according Rajput 

nobles  high positions in the Mughal court. 
A tolerant religious policy ensured the 
cultural and emotional integration of the 
people. Even before Akbar, many Muslim 
kings had married Rajput princesses. But 

Akbar with his broadminded nature was 
instrumental in these matrimonial alliances 
becoming a synthesising force between two 
di˝erent cultures as he maintained close 
relations with the families.
Akbar had married Harkha Bhai 
(also referred to as Jodha in popular 

accounts), the daughter of Raja Bhar Mal 

(also known as Bihari Mal) of Amber. 
He also married the Rajput princesses of 
Bikaner and Jaisalmer. Prince Salim who 
was born of Harkha Bhai married the 
daughter of Raja Bhagwan Das. Raja Man 

Singh, son of Bhagwan Das, became the 
trusted general of Akbar. Even the Rajputs 
who chose not to have any matrimonial 
alliances were bestowed great honours 
in Akbar™s court. His Rajput policy 

38did not give up his attempt to know the 
Truth. Akbar discussed personally with 
the leading lights of different religions 
like Purushotam and Devi (Hinduism), 
Meherji Rana (Zorastrianism), the 
Portugese Aquaviva and Monserrate 

(Christianity) and Hira Vijaya Suri 
(Jainism) to ascertain the Truth. Because 
of the discussions he felt that behind 

the multiplicity of names there was but 
one God. The exact word used by Akbar 
and Badauni to illustrate the philosophy 
of Akbar is Tauhid-i-Ilahi namely Din 
Ilahi. Tauhid-i-Ilahi literally meant divine 

monotheism. 
It can be considered a sufistic order 
but not a new religion. He had become a 
Pir (Sufi Guru) who enrolled Murids (Sufi 
disciples) who would follow a set pattern 

of rules ascribed by the Guru. Thousands 
of disciples enrolled as his disciples. 
Akbar™s intention was to establish a state 

based on the concept of secular principles, 
equal toleration, and respect to all sections 
irrespective of their religious beliefs. He 
set up a big translation department for 
translating works in Sanskrit, Arabic, 

Greek, etc, into Persian. The Ramayana, 
Mahabharata, the Atharva Veda, the 
Bible and the Quran were translated into 
Persian. The Din Ilahi   ceased to exist 
after Akbar.
14.6 Jahangir (1605Œ1627)Akbar was succeeded by his son Salim with 

the title Nur-ud-din Jahangir. He was Akbar™s 
son by a Rajput wife.  His ascension was 
challenged by his eldest son Prince Khusrau 
who staged a revolt with the blessings of 
Sikh Guru Arjun Dev. Prince Khusrau 

was defeated, captured and blinded, while 
Guru Arjun Dev was executed. Jahangir 
also tamed the rebel Afghan Usman Khan 

in Bengal. Mewar, which had de˙ed Akbar 
under Rana Udai Singh and his son Rana 
Pratap Singh, was brought to terms by 
officials combined into one single 

service with each officer receiving the 
title of Mansabdar. Mansabdar rank was 
divided into Zat and Sawar. The former 
determined the number of soldiers each 
Mansabdar received ranging from 10 to 

10,000. The latter determined the number 
of horses under a Mansabdar. Each officer 
could rise from the lowest to the highest 
ranks. Promotions and demotions were 
made through additions or reductions 

of Mansabs. The Mansabdari system 
diversified the ethnic base of his nobility. 
During Akbar™s early years the nobles were 

drawn exclusively from Central Asians 
or Persians. But after the introduction 
of the Mansabdari system, the nobility 
encompassed Rajputs and Shaikhzadas 
(Indian Muslims). The salary of a 

Mansabdar was fixed in cash but was paid 
by assigning him a jagir (an estate from 
which he could collect money in lieu of 
his salary), which was subjected to regular 
transfers. The rank of Mansabdar was not 

hereditary and immediately after the death 
of a Mansabdar, the jagir  was resumed by 
the state.
Akbar™s Religious PolicyAkbar began his life as an orthodox 

Muslim but adopted an accommodative 
approach under the influence of Sufism. 
Akbar was interested to learn about the 
doctrines of all religions, and propagated 
a philosophy of Sulh-i-Kul (peace to all). 

Badauni, a contemporary author, who did 
not like Akbar™s inter-religious interests, 
accused him of forsaking Islam. Akbar 

had established an Ibadat Khana, a hall of 
worship in which initially Muslim clerics 
gathered to discuss spiritual issues. Later he 
invited Christians, Zoroastrians, Hindus, 
Jains and even atheists to discussions. 
In 1582, he discontinued the debates 
in the Ibadat Khana as it led to bitterness 

among different religions. However, he 

39Persians in 1595, was retaken by the Persian 
King Shah Abbas in 1622.  Jahangir wanted 
to recapture it. But he could not achieve 
it due to the rebellion of Prince Khurram. 
Jahangir™s reign witnessed the visit of 
two Englishmen Œ William Hawkins and 

Sir ˜omas Roe. While the former could 
not get the consent of the Emperor for 
establishing an English factory in India, 

the latter, sent as ambassador by King 
James I, succeeded in securing permission 
to establish a British factory at Surat. 
Jahangir was more interested in 
art and painting and gardens and flowers, 

than in government. His Persian wife 
Mehrunnisa, renamed as Nur-Jahan by 
Jahangir, became the real power behind 
the throne.  The political intrigues that 
prevailed because of Nur-Jahan, led 

Prince Khurram to rebel against his father 
but due to the efforts of Mahabat Khan, 
a loyal general of Jahangir, the rebellion 

could not be fruitful. Prince Khurram had 
to retreat to the Deccan. The intrigues 
of Nur-Jahan also made Mahabat Khan 
to rise in revolt which was effectively 
handled by Nur-Jahan. Mahabat Khan 

also retreated to Deccan to join Prince 
Khurram. Immediately after the death 
of Jahangir, Nur-Jahan wanted to crown 
her son-in-law Shahryar Khan but due 
Jahangir a˚er a military campaign led by 
his son Prince Khurram (later to become 
Emperor Shah Jahan) against Rana Amar 
Singh, the grandson of Rana Udai Singh. 
˜ey concluded a treaty whereby Rana 
Amar Singh could rule his kingdom a˚er 

accepting the suzerainty of Jahangir. In 1608 
Ahmad Nagar in the Deccan had declared 
independence under Malik Ambar.
Jahangir
Several attempts by prince Khurram 
to conquer Ahmad Nagar ended in failure. 
Prince Khurram had conquered the fort 
of Kangra a˚er a siege of 14 months. 
Kandahar, conquered by Akbar from the 
Malik AmbarBrought as a slave from Ethiopia to India, Malik Ambar changed several 
hands before landing at the hands of the Prime Minister of Ahmad nagar 

named Chengiz Khan. Malik Ambar learnt about statecra˚, military and 

administrative a˛airs from Chengiz Khan. A˚er the death of Chengiz Khan 

his wife set Malik Ambar free. By dint of his hard work Malik rising through 

several ranks became the Military Commander and Regent of one of the south 

Indian Sultanates. 
In the Deccan Muslims and Marathas had united to resist Mughal 
hegemony in their bid to preserve their distinct regional and political identity. Malik Ambar was 

the brain behind this move. Trained by Malik Ambar the Marathas became a force to reckon 

with a˚er Malik™s death at the age of 78 on 14 May 1626. 

40restored in the Deccan, Shah Jahan leˇ the 
Deccan aˇer dividing it into four provinces: 
Ahmednagar with Daulatabad; Khandesh; 
Berar; and Telengana. ˛e viceroyalty of 
the four provinces was conferred by Shah 
Jahan on his son Aurangzeb, then eighteen 

years of age. 
Deccan SultanatesAˇer ˘ourishing for over a hundred years 
the Bahmani kingdom, that covered much 

of Maharashtra and Andhra along with 

a portion of Karnataka, disintegrated 

and powerful nobles carved out new 

dominions at Golkonda (Qutb Shahs), 

Bijapur (Adil Shahs), Berar (Imad Shahs), 
Bidar (Barid Shahs) and Ahmad Nagar 
(Nizam Shahs), which go by the collective 

name of Deccan Sultanates or Southern 
Sultanates.
Thus the Deccan was brought 
under the effective control of the Mughal 
empire during the reign of Shah Jahan. 
Ahmad Nagar, which offered resistance 
to the Mughals, was annexed despite the 
efforts of Malik Ambar. Shah Jahan, with 
the help of Mahabat Khan, subdued the 

Nizam Shahi rulers of Ahmad Nagar in 
1636. When the Shi™ite Qutub Shahi ruler 
of Golkonda imprisoned his own minister 

Mir Jumla it was used as a pretext by 
to the efforts of Nur-Jahan™s brother and 
Prince Khurram™s father-in-law Asaf 

Khan, Prince Khurram succeeded as the 
next Mughal emperor with the title Shah-
Jahan. Nur-Jahan, who ruled the empire 
for ten years, lost her power and influence 
after Jahangir™s death in December 1645.
14.7  
Shah Jahan 
 (1627-1658)When Shah Jahan ascended the throne 

in Agra his position was secure and 
unchallenged. Yet the a˝airs of the empire 
needed attention. ˛e Afghan Pir Lodi, 
with the title Khanjahan, who had been 
governor of the southern provinces of 

the empire was hostile. Despite Shah 
Jahan™s order transferring him from the 
government of the Deccan, he aligned 

with Murtaza Nizam Shah II, the Sultan of 
Ahmed-Nagar, and conspired against Shah 
Jahan. As the situation turned serious, 
Shah Jahan proceeded to the Deccan in 
person. ˛e newly appointed governor of 

the Deccan, Iradat Khan, who received 
the title Azam Khan led the imperial army 
and invaded the Balaghat. Seeing the 
devastation caused by the imperial troops, 
Murtaza changed his attitude towards 

Khanjahan. Khanjahan thereupon ˘ed from 
Daulatabad into Malwa, but was pursued 
and ˙nally slain.  Peace thus having been 
Sir Thomas Roe in Jahangir's court

41In 1641, Shah Jahan™s minister and 
father-in-law Asaf Khan died. Asaf Khan™s 
sister and Shah Jahan™s old enemy Nur 
Jahan, survived until December 1645, but 
lived in retirement and never caused him 
trouble again. 
Nur
 Jahan
Aurangzeb to invade Golkonda. A treaty 

made the Qutub Shahi ruler a vassal of the 
Mughal empire.
In 1638 Shah Jahan made use of the 
political intrigues in the Persian empire 
and annexed Kandahar, conquered by 

Akbar and lost by Jahangir. 
˛e Portuguese had authority over 
Goa under their viceroy. In Bengal they had 

their chief settlements in faraway Hugli. 
Shah Jahan ordered the Mughal Governor of 
Bengal, to drive out the Portuguese from their 
settlement at Hugli. About 200 Portuguese at 
Hugli owned nearly 600 Indian slaves. ˛ey 

had forced many of them to be baptised into 
the Christian faith. Moreover Portuguese 
gunners from Goa had assisted the Bijapur 
forces against the Mughals. ˛ough the 
Portuguese defended themselves valiantly, 

they were easily defeated.
European Factories/Settlements during Mughal RulePortuguese
In 1510, Albuquerque captured Goa from the ruler of Bijapur and made it the capital of the 
Portuguese Empire in the East. Subsequently Daman, Salsette and Bombay on the west coast 

and at Santhome near Madras and Hugli in Bengal on the east coast had become Portuguese 

settlements.
Dutch
˛e Dutch set up factories at Masulipatam (1605), Pulicat (1610), Surat (1616), Bimilipatam 

(1641), Karaikal (1645), Chinsura (1653), Kasimbazar, Baranagore, Patna, Balasore, Nagapattinam 

(all in 1658) and Cochin (1663).
Danes
Denmark also established trade settlements in India and their settlements were at Tranquebar in 

Tamilnadu (1620) and Serampore, their headquarters in Bengal.
French
Surat (1668), Masulipatnam (1669), Pondicherry, a small village then (1673),
 Chandernagore in Bengal (1690). Later they acquired Mahe in the Malabar, Yanam in Coromandal 

(both in 1725) and Karaikal (1739).
English
˛e Company ˙rst created a trading post in Surat (where a factory was built in 1612), and then 

secured Madras (1639), Bombay (1668), and Calcutta (1690). ˛ough the Company had many 

factories, Fort William in Bengal, Fort St George in Madras, and the Bombay Castle were the 

three major trade settlements of theEnglish.

42was astute, determined and unscrupulous. 
Dara, professed the Sunni religion, but 
was deeply interested in Sufism.  A war 
of succession broke out between the four 
sons of Shah Jahan in which Aurangzeb 
emerged victorious. 
Aurangzeb imprisoned Shah Jahan 
and crowned himself as the Mughal 

emperor. Shah Jahan died broken hearted 

as a royal prisoner in January 1666 and 
was buried in the Taj Mahal next to his 
wife.
14.8  
Aurangzeb  (1658Œ1707)Aurangzeb Alamgir (ﬁWorld Conquerorﬂ) 

ascended the throne in 1658 after getting 
rid of all the competitors for the throne, 
Dara Shukoh, Shuja and Murad, in a war 
of succession. His reign of fifty years falls 
into two equal parts. During the first 

twenty-five years he resided in the north, 
chiefly at Delhi, and personally occupied 
himself with the affairs of northern India, 

leaving the Deccan in the hands of his 
viceroys. Around 1681 he was prompted 
by the rebellion of one of his sons, Prince 
Akbar, to go to the Deccan. He never 
A contemporary of Louis XIV of 
France, Shah Jahan ruled for thirty years. 
In his reign the famous Peacock Throne 
was made for the King. He built the Taj 
Mahal by the side of the Yamuna at Agra. 

Europeans like Bernier (French physician 
and traveller), Tavernier (French gem 
merchant and traveller), Mandelslo 

(German adventurer and traveller), Peter 
Mundy (English Trader) and Manucci 
(Italian writer and traveller) visited India 
during the reign of Shah Jahan and left 
behind detailed accounts of India. 
During the last days of Shah Jahan, 
there was a contest for the throne amongst 

his four sons. Dara Shukoh, the eldest, was 
the favourite of his father. He had been 
nominated as heir apparent, a fact resented 

by his brothers. Aurangzeb, the third son, 
Taj Mahal:
 The Taj Mahal, is the epitome of 
Mughal architecture, a blend of Indian, Persian 
and Islamic styles. It was built by the Shah Jahan 

to immortalize his wife Mumtaz Mahal. Mumtaz 

Mahal died in childbirth in 1631, after having 

been the emperor™s inseparable companion since 

their marriage in 1612. The plans for the complex 

have been attributed to various architects of the 

period, though the chief architect was Ustad 

Ahmad Lahawri, an Indian of Persian descent. 

The complex - main gateway, garden, mosque and mausoleum (including its four minarets)-

were conceived and designed as a unified entity.  Building commenced in about 1632. More 

than 20,000 workers were employed from India, Persia, the Ottoman Empire and Europe to 

complete the mausoleum by about 1638Œ39; the adjunct buildings were finished by 1643, 

and decoration work continued until at least 1647. 
Taj Mahal
Dara Shukoh, who lost the battle for the 
throne of Delhi to his brother Aurangzeb, 

was known as the Philosopher Prince. He 

brought di˝erent cultures into dialogue 

and found a close connection between 

Hinduism and Islam. He translated the 

Upanishads from Sanskrit to Persian.

43˛is ˙nally ended with the execution of 
Guru Tegh Bahadur, the ninth Sikh Guru.
Aurangzeb™s decision that the jizya 
(poll tax) should be levied on Hindus of 
all classes agitated the chiefs of Rajasthan, 
who had until then served the empire 

faithfully. The death of Jaswant Singh 
of Marwar brought about a succession 
issue. The Rajput queen Rani Hadi, wife 

of Raja Jaswant Singh, resented the move 
of Aurangzeb to install Indra Singh, a 
grandnephew of Jaswant Singh, a titular 
chief of the state. This led to a revolt 
with the help of Rathor Rajputs, but was 

effectively put down. The Rana of Mewar, 
Rana Raj Singh, resenting the interference 
of Aurangzeb in the affairs of Marwar rose 
in revolt and he was supported by Prince 
Akbar, the rebellious son of Aurangzeb. 

However, the Rana could not match the 
Mughal forces and fought a guerrilla 
warfare till his death in 1680. In 1681 

Rana Jai Singh, the new Rana of Mewar, 
signed a peace treaty with Aurangzeb. 
Aurangzeb™s Deccan Policy˛e Deccan policy of Aurangzeb was 
motivated by the policy of containing the 
growing in˘uence of the Marathas, the 
rebellious attitude of the Shia kingdoms of 
Deccan like Golkonda and Bijapur and to 
curtail the rebellious activities of his son 

Akbar who had taken refuge in the Deccan. 
Aurangzeb came to the Deccan in 1682 and 
remained in the Deccan till his death in 

1707. ˛e Adil Shahi ruler Sikkandar Adil 
Shah of Bijapur resisted the di˝erent forces 
sent by Aurangzeb. Aurangzeb ˙rst sent his 
son Azam Shah (1685) but to no avail. ˛en 
he sent another son, Shah Alam to capture 

Bijapur. ˛ough Bijapur Sultan, a Shia 
Muslim, ably defended the fort, he lost in the 
end, because Aurangzeb himself entered the 
battle˙eld and inspired his forces to ˙ght to 
the ˙nish. Golkonda was captured in 1687 

aˇer defeating the ruler Abul Hasan.
returned to Delhi, dying disappointed at 
Ahmad Nagar in 1707.
Aurangzeb
Aurangzeb conducted several 
military campaigns to extend the frontiers 

of the Mughal empire. His wars in the 
northwest and northeast drained the 
treasury. Already under his father, the 
revenue of the crops had been raised 

from a third to a half, and the extensive 
and the prolonged military campaigns he 
waged required him to keep the peasantry 

heavily taxed. Aurangzeb retained Shah 
Jahanabad as his capital, but after some 
two decades the capital was shifted to 
wherever Aurangzeb would set up camp 
during his long military campaigns. 
In the north there were three major 
uprisings against Aurangzeb. ˛e Jats 

(Mathura district), the Satnamis (Haryana 
region), and the Sikhs rebelled against 
Aurangzeb. ˛e Jat rebellion (1669), a 

constant feature even during the reign 
of Jahangir and Shah Jahan, was crushed 
temporarily but they remained restive even 

aˇer the death of Aurangzeb. ˛e Satnamis 
revolt was crushed with the help local Hindu 
zamindars.  ˛e Sikh (˛e Punjab) rebellion 
erupted due to the political intrigues of Ram 
Rai, a claimant for the position of Sikh Guru, 

against the incumbent Guru Tegh Bahadur. 

44was severely tested by the Marathas till 
his death in 1707 as the sons of Shivaji 
continued the rebellion. The death of 
Aurangzeb in 1707 marked a watershed 
in Indian history as the Mughal empire 
virtually came to end even though the 

weak successors of Aurangzeb held the 
throne the next 150 years. 
Aurangzeb nursed a grudge against 
the Sikhs for having supported his 
Against MarathasThe Marathas under Shivaji were a threat 
to Aurangzeb. Aurangzeb sent two of his 
great generals Shaista Khan and Jai Singh 
one after the other to capture Shivaji. Jai 
Singh captured Shivaji and took him to 
Delhi but Shivaji managed to escape to 

the Deccan. Shivaji, employing guerrilla 
tactics, defied the Mughal forces till his 
death at the age of 53 in 1680. Aurangzeb 
Map not to scaleNSWELakshadweep islands(INDIA)Andaman and nicobar islands(INDIA)BAY OFBENGALARABIANSEAINDIAN OCEANKabulPeshawarRajputsDiuMumbaiGoaCochinPolygarsDelhiAgra
GondwanaAllahabadPanipatPatnaKashmir AjmerMalwa
Gujarat
AsirgarhAhmadnagarPurandhar
BengalAURANGZEB™S EMPIRECalicutVelloreSenjiThanjavurBijapurGol Gumbaz
Bijapur (modern Vijayapura) was the capital of the Adil Shahi dynasty during1480-1686. It is famous for 
its magni˙cent buildings and dargahs.  Gol Gumbaz (round dome) is the mausoleum of the seventh ruler 
of the dynasty Mohammad Adil Shah (1627-1656). Mohammad Adi Shah commissioned the mausoleum 
in his lifetime. Built of dark grey basalt and decorated plaster, the exterior of Gol Gumbaz is simple but 

beautiful. On the four corners of the bare walls are four doomed octagonal towers. Each tower has seven 
storeys and each storey has several windows which give the structure a striking look. ˛e dome is the 
second largest in the world aˇer St. Peter™s Basilica in Rome. ˛e huge chamber of 135 ˇ each way and 178 
ˇ high contains an elevated platform on which ˙ve cenotaphs are placed. ˛ose are of Muhammad Adil 
Shah, his wife Arus Bibi, a daughter, a grandson and his favourite mistress Rambha. 

45in practice applied to places where he 
had political adversaries. In areas where 
there was no political insubordination, 
Aurangzeb provided endowments to build 
temples. It should be noted that during the 
reign of Aurangzeb the number of Hindu 

officials increased when compared to the 
reign of Shah Jahan. 
14.9 Mughal SocietyThe population of India is estimated to 
have been around 15 crores in the 16
th century and 20 crores in the 18
th century. 
Large areas of land were under forest 
cover and the area under cultivation 
would have been much less. As agriculture 
was the prime occupation of the society 
the village community was the chief 

institution of social organisation. Though 
the nature, composition and governance 
of village differed from place to place 

there were certain similarities in the 
village administration. The Muqaddam, 
privileged headman of the village, formed 
the Panch (Panchayat), an administrative 
organ of the village. The Panch was 

responsible for collection and maintenance 
of accounts at the village level. The Panch 
allotted the unoccupied lands of the village 
to artisans, menials and servants for their 
service to the village.
The middle class consisted of 
small Mansabdars, petty shopkeepers, 

hakims (doctors), musicians, artists, petty 

officials of Mughal administration. There 
was a salaried class, and received grants 
called Madad-i-Mash from the Mughal 
emperor, local rulers and zamindars. This 
section often became part of the rural 

gentry and a link between the village and 
the town. Delhi, Agra, Fatehpur Sikri, 
Lahore, Ahmadabad, Dacca and Multan 
were important cities of the empire which 
could be ranked along with contemporary 

European cities like London and Paris.
brother and principal rival to the throne, 

Dara Shukoh. Guru Tegh Bahadur, was 

killed at Aurangzeb™s command. In 1680 
Aurangzeb sent a formidable army under 
his son Akbar to subdue the rebellious 
Rajput kings, but the emperor had not 
reckoned with his son™s traitorous conduct. 

Akbar, had declared himself the emperor, 
but was compelled to flee to the Deccan, 
where he enlisted the help of Shivaji™s son, 
Sambhaji. Aurangzeb decided to take to 
the field himself, and eventually drove 

his own son into exile in Persia. Sambhaji 
was captured in 1689 and executed. The 
Sultanates of Bijapur and Golkonda were 

also reduced to utter submission. 
Towards the end of his reign, 
Aurangzeb™s empire began to disintegrate 
and this process was accelerated in the years 
aˇer his death, when ﬁsuccessor statesﬂ came 

into existence. ˛e empire had become too 
large and unwieldy. Aurangzeb did not have 
enough trustworthy men at his command 
to manage the more far-˘ung parts of the 
empire. Many of his political appointees 

broke loose and declared themselves 
independent. Aurangzeb™s preoccupation 
with a˝airs in the Deccan prevented him 

from meeting political challenges emanating 
from other parts of the empire. Shortly aˇer 
the death of Aurangzeb, the Mughal empire 
ceased to be an e˝ective force in the political 
life of India. 
Aurangzeb re-imposed jizya. He 
also issued orders that new temples should 

not be constructed; but the repair of old 
long-standing temples was permitted. 
These measures were rooted not only in 

his religious faith but also due to political 
compulsions. Jizya had been levied for a 
long time in India. As a staunch Muslim, 

Aurangzeb had discontinued the practise 
of levying 
abwab
, a tax levied on the lands 
over and above the original rent, not 

sanctioned by Shariah. Likewise, the order 
on temples was also an older one which 

46and Iran. Afghans, Indian Muslims 
(shaikhzadas), Rajputs and Marathas 
also obtained the status of nobility.  It is 
estimated that during the reign of Akbar 
over 15% of the nobility consisted of 
Rajputs. Raja Man Singh, Raja Todar 

Mal and Raja Birbal were Rajput nobles 
of repute during Akbar.  The Rajputs 
appointed Kayasths and Khatris for various 

positions in government administration. 
Jahangir, Shah Jahan and Aurangzeb 
employed Marathas in their nobility. For 
example, Shaji, father of Shivaji, served 
Shah Jahan for some time. 
There were continuous migrations 
from Central Asia as there were better 

career prospects in India. These migrations 
led to the enrichment of culture through 
assimilation of diversity. Though the 

nobility was divided on ethnic lines they 
formed a composite class promoting a 
syncretic culture by patronising painters, 

musicians and singers of both Persian and 
Indian origin.
The caste system was a dominant 
institution in the society. Castes at 
lower levels were subject to much 

repression. Despite the popular Bhakti 
movement raising the banner of revolt 
against discrimination, the deprived and 
disadvantaged classes, who were landless 
peasants, were subject to forced labour.
The Hindu women had only limited 
right of inheritance. Widow remarriage 
The inequality in the standard 
of life amongst the privileged and the 
underprivileged classes was clear. Among 
the lower strata of society, the men wore 
just a langota and the women a sari. 
Footwear was not common. The poor 

lived in houses made of mud and their 
diet consisted of wheat chapatis with 
pulses and vegetables. On the contrary 

the Mughal privileged class consisting of 
zamindars and nobles led an ostentatious 
life. The nobles were Mansabdars who 
received jagirs or land grants as payment 
according to their ranks. The jagirdars 

were exploitative and oppressive in 
nature. The nobles maintained a large 
train of servants, large stables of horses, 
elephants, etc. The nobles lived in fine 
houses containing gardens with fruit trees 

and running water. They wore the finest 
of clothing. 
The Zamindars, members of 
dominant clans and castes with armed 

retainers, were a dominant class with 
privilege over lands of the peasants. Abul 
Fazal in his Ain-i-Akbari enlists the castes 
that were entitled to be zamindars. While 

mostly upper caste Hindus and Rajputs 
were zamindars, in certain localities 
Muslim zamindars existed. The zamindars 
had the right to evict the peasants, in 
default of payment of rent.
In Mughal social structure, the 
nobles came mostly from Central Asia 
Raja Man Singh
Raja Birbal
Todar Mal

47during the Mughal period. Sericulture 
underwent spectacular growth in Bengal 
to the extent that it became the chief 
supplier of silk to world trade. 
As the farmers were compelled to 
pay land tax they had to sell the surplus 

in the market. The land tax was a share 
of the actual produce and was a major 
source of revenue for the Mughal ruling 

class. The administration determined the 
productivity of the land and assessed the 
tax based on the total measurement. Akbar 
promulgated the Zabt System (introduced 
by Todal Mal): money revenue rates were 

now fixed on each unit of area according 
to the crops cultivated. The schedules 
containing these rates for different 
localities applicable year after year were 
called 
dasturs
.The urban economy was based on 
craft industry. Cotton textile industry 
employed large numbers of people 

as cotton carders, spinners, dyers, 
printers and washers. Iron, copper, 
diamond mining and gun making were 
other chief occupations. Kharkhanas 
were workshops where expensive craft 

products were produced. The royal 
kharkhanas manufactured articles for 
the use of the royal family and nobility. 
The excess production of the artisans was 
diverted to the merchants and traders for 

local and distant markets. 
Trade and CommerceThe political integration of the country 

with efficient maintenance of law and 
order ensured brisk trade and commerce. 
The surplus was carried to different parts 
of the country through rivers, and through 
the roads on ox and camel drawn carts. 

Banjaras were specialised traders who 
carried goods in a large bulk over long 
distances. Bengal was the chief exporting 

centre of rice, sugar, muslin, silk and food 
was not permitted among upper caste 

women. Along with household activities 
the women were involved in spinning yarn 
and helped in agricultural operations. 
Mughal administration discouraged the 
practise of sati that was prevalent among 

communities of the higher caste. Muslim 
brides were entitled to receive 
mehr
 (money mandatorily paid by the groom) 
at the time of marriage, and also had the 
right to inherit property, though it was not 
equal to the share of the male members of 
the family. 
14.10 EconomyThe Mughal economy was a forest-based 
agricultural economy. The forests provided 
the raw materials for the craftsmen. 
Timber went to carpenters, wood carvers 
and shipwrights, lacquerware makers; 
wild silk to reelers and weavers; charcoal 

to iron miners and metal smiths. Hence 
the relationship between manufacturing 
and the forest was very close.
Different classes of the rural 
population were involved in agriculture. 

Agriculture was the chief activity in the 
economy. Landless agricultural labourers 
without right to property formed almost a 

quarter of the population. Zamindars and 
village headmen possessed large tracts of 
land in which they employed labourers 
and paid them in cash and kind. Well 
irrigation was the dominant mode of 

irrigation.
The 
Ain-i-Akbari
 lists the various 
crops cultivated during the Rabi and 

Kharif seasons. Tobacco and maize 
were introduced in the seventeenth 
century. Chilli and groundnut came later. 
Pineapple was introduced in the sixteenth 
century. Grafted varieties of mango came 

to be developed by the Portuguese. Potato, 
tomato and guava came later. Indigo was 
another important commercial crop 

48the object of bhakti (devotion) was Krishna, 
an incarnation of Vishnu. 
The Bhakti movement made great 
strides during this period. Poets and 
saints emerged from various parts of the 
country. They were critical of rituals, 

and criticised the caste system. Rather 
than using Sanskrit for expressing their 
devotion, they employed the language of 

the common people. The radical ideas, 
and the easy but catchy language often 
set to music made them popular among 
the masses. Some of the major religious 
figures like Vallabhacharya and his son 

Vitthalnath propagated a religion of grace; 
and Surdas, an adherent to this sect, wrote 
Sur-Saravali
 in the local language.  Eknath 
and Tukaram were Bhakti poets from 

Maharashtra. The Dasakuta movement, 

a bhakti movement in Karnataka, 
popularised by Vyasaraya, turned out to 
be a lower class movement. 
The most important figure of the 
Bhakti movement was Kabir. Said to be 

a weaver, Kabir propounded absolute 
monotheism, condemned image worship 
and rituals, and the caste system. His 

popular poetry written in a simple 
language was spread orally across large 
parts of north India. 
An interesting aspect of the 
Bhakti poets was that they came from 

lower castes practising craft and service 
grains. The Coromandel coast was reputed 

for its textile production. Kashmiri 
shawls and carpets were distributed from 
Lahore which was an important centre of 
handicraft production. The movement 
of goods was facilitated by letters of 

credit called 
hundi
. The network of sarais 
enabled the traders and merchants to 

travel to various places. The traders came 

from all religious communities: Hindus, 
Muslims and Jains. The Bohra Muslims of 
Gujarat, Marwaris of Rajasthan, Chettiars 
on Coromandel coast, and Muslims 
of Malabar were prominent trading 

communities. 
Europeans controlled trade with 
the West Asia and European countries, 
and restricted the involvement of Indian 
traders. Moreover, the Mughal empire, 

despite its vast resources and a huge 
army, was not a naval power. They did not 
realise that they were living in an era of 

expanding maritime trade. 
Europeans imported spices, indigo, 
Bengal silk, muslin, calico and chintz. In 
return, India obtained large quantities 
of silver and gold. Mughal silver coinage 

fuelled the demand for silver. 
14.11 Religion˛e Mughal period witnessed a continuing 

assertion of all the basic elements in puranic 
traditions. ˛ough it was diˆcult to speak 
of Hinduism as a single body of doctrine, in 
view of the countless faiths and innumerable 
customs and practices, having developed in 

mutual interaction and expressed in a large 
part in the same language (Sanskrit), the 
di˝erent sects of Hinduism yet shared the 

same idiom and the same or similar deities. 
˛e sixteenth and seventeenth centuries 
were the centuries of Vaishnavism. Tulsidas  
(Ramcharitmanas) 
a great proponent of 
Rama cult in his popular verses of devotion 
portrayed Rama as a god incarnate. ˛e 
expression of bhakti was deeply emotional as 
Kabir

4914.12  
Science and 
TechnologyThe Madrasas continued to be concerned 
principally with Muslim theology and its 
vast literature. In great learning centres like 
Varanasi, astrology was taught and there 
was no institution in India, as noted by the 
French traveller Bernier, to the standards 

of colleges and universities in Europe. 
This made the imparting of scientific 
subjects almost impossible. Attention 

was, however, given to mathematics 
and astronomy. Akbar™s court poet Faizi 
translated Bhaskaracharya™s famous 
work on mathematics, 
Lilavati. 
Despite 
the presence of Europeans, there was no 
influence of them on the Indian society 
during the Mughal period.
The method of water-lift based on 
pin-drum gearing known as Persian wheel 
had been introduced during Babur™s time. 

A complicated system of water lift by a 
series of gear-wheels had been installed 
in Fatehpur Sikri. Akbar was also credited 

with popularizing the device of cooling 
water using saltpetre. He is also the first 
known person in the world to have devised 
the ‚ship's camel™, a barge on which the 
ship is built to make it easier for the ship 

to be carried to the sea. Some mechanical 
devices like the screw for tightening, 
manually driven belt-drill for cutting 
diamonds were in use. Agricultural tools 
continued to be the same, made entirely 

of wood. In metallurgy, the inability to 
produce cast iron remained an obvious 
drawback. As Irfan Habib observed, 

‚India™s backwardness in technology was 
obvious when the matchlock remained the 
most common weapon in Indian armies. 
In Europe the flintlock had long come 
into use. Indians continued to use the 

expensive bronze cannon, long after these 
had become obsolete in Europe. This was 
because of India™s inability to make cast 
iron even in the seventeenth century.™            
occupations. Kabir was a weaver, Ravidas, 

a worker in hides, Sain, was a barber, and 
Dadu, a cotton carder. The Satnami sect in 

Haryana credited its origin to Kabir and 
his teachings. While Sanskrit and Persian 
were the languages of administration 

and intellectual activity, the vernacular 
languages demonstrated their literary 
vitality. 
SikhismSikhism originated as a popular 

monotheistic movement, and evolved 
into one of the recognised religions of the 
world. Guru Granth Sahib, the holy book 
of Sikhs, contained the sayings of Muslim 
saint Shaikh Farid and of Bhakti poets 

such as Namdev, Kabir, Sain and Ravidas. 
Guru Nanak believed in one God who was 
formless and omnipresent. He condemned 

image worship and religious rituals. He 
stressed ethical conduct, kindness to 
all human beings and condemned caste 
system. 
India was a fertile soil for the prevalence 
of Sufism or Muslim mysticism that had 
its origin in Iran. It was accepted by the 
orthodox theologians as long as it fulfilled 
the obligations of the 
shariah. 
Sufism 
played a key role in creating religious 
harmony.
ChristianityAlong with the European traders came the 

Christian missionaries like Roberto De Nobili, 
Francis Xavier. ˛e early missionaries were 
Catholics. ˛e ˙rst Lutheran missionaries 
under Danish patronage arrived in 1706 at 
Tranquebar and Ziegenbalg translated the 

New Testament of the Bible into Tamil in 
1714, and soon the Old Testament as well. 
˛is was the earliest translation of the Bible 

in any Indian language.

50at Sikandra near Agra started by Akbar 
and completed by Jahangir includes 
some Buddhist architectural elements. 
The tomb of Itimad-ud-daula, father of 
Nurjahan, built by Jahangir was the first 
Mughal building built completely with 

white marble.  
Mughal architecture reached its 
apex during the reign of Shah Jahan. The 

Taj Mahal is a marble structure on an 
elevated platform, the bulbous dome in 
the centre rising on a recessed gateway 
with four cupolas around the dome and 
with four free-standing minarets at each 

of its corners is a monument of universal 
fame. The Red Fort in Delhi, encompassed 
by magnificent buildings like Diwan-i 
Aam, Diwan-i-Khas, Moti Mahal and 
Hira Mahal reflect the architectural 

skills of the times of Shah Jahan. The 
Moti Masjid inside the Agra Fort made 
exclusively of marble, the Jama Masjid 

in Delhi, with its lofty gateway, series of 
domes and tall and slender minarets are 
the two significant mosques built by Shah 
Jahan. He also established a new township, 
Shah jahanabad (present-day Old Delhi) 

where Red Fort and Jama Masjid are 
located. Aurangzeb™s reign witnessed 
the construction of Badshahi mosque 
in Lahore and the marble tomb of Rabia 
ud daurani, known as  Bibi-ka-maqbara 

(Tomb of the Lady) at Aurangabad.
The Shalimar Gardens of Jahangir 
and Shah Jahan are showpieces of Indian 
ArchitectureArchitectural progress 

during the Mughals is a 
landmark in world art. 
Mughal buildings were 
noted for the massive 
structures decorated with bulbous domes, 

splendorous minarets, cupolas in the four 
corners, elaborate designs, and pietra dura 
(pictorial mosaic work). The mosques 

built during the time of Babur and 
Humayun are not of much architectural 
significance. The Sur dynasty left behind 
a few spectacular specimens in the form 
of the Purana Qila at Delhi, and the tombs 

of Sher Shah and Islam Shah at Sasaram 
in Bihar. The Purana Qila with a raised 
citadel and the tombs on a terraced 
platform surrounded by large tanks were 
novel features.
During Akbar™s reign, Humayun™s 
tomb was enclosed with gardens and 

placed on a raised platform. Built by Indian 

artisans and designed by Persian architects 
it set a pattern to be followed in the future. 
The Agra fort built with red sandstone is 
a specimen where Rajput architectural 
styles were also incorporated. The new 

capital city of Akbar Fatehpur Sikri 
enclosed within its walls several inspiring 
buildings. The magnificent gateway to 
Fatehpur Sikri, the Buland Darwaza, built 
by Akbar with red sandstone and marble 

is considered to be a perfect architectural 
achievement. The mausoleum of Akbar 
Buland Darwaza
Red Fort
Fatehpur Sikri-Panch Mahal

51Music and DanceAccording to Ain-i-Akbari, Tansen of 
Gwalior, credited with composing of 
many ragas, was patronised by Akbar 
along with 35 other musicians. Jahangir 
and Shah Jahan were patrons of music. 
Though there is a popular misconception 

that Aurangzeb was against music, a large 
number of books on Indian classical 
music were written during his regime. 

His queens, princes and nobles continued 
to patronise music. The later Mughal 
Muhammad Shah was instrumental in 
inspiring important developments in the 
field of music. Paintings in Babur Namah 

and Padshah Namah depict woman 
dancing to the accompaniment of musical 
instruments. 
LiteraturePersian, Sanskrit and regional languages 

developed during the Mughal rule. Persian 
was the language of administration in 
Mughal Empire and the Deccan states. It 
influenced even the Rajput states where 
Persian words were used in administration. 

Abul Fazal patronised by Akbar compiled 
the history of Akbar in Akbar Nama and 
described Mughal administration in his 

work Ain-i-Akbari. The Ain-i-Akbari is 
commendable for its interest in science, 
statistics, geography and culture. Akbar 
Namah was emulated by Abdul Hamid 
Lahori and Muhammad Waris in their 

joint work Padshah Nama, a biography of 
Shah Jahan. Later Muhammad Kazim in 
his Alamgir Nama, a work on the reign of 
the first decade of Aurangzeb, followed 
the same pattern. Babur™s autobiography 

written in Chaghatai Turkish was 
translated into Persian by Abdur Rahim 
Khan-e-Khanan. Dabistan is an impartial 

account of the beliefs and works of 
different religions. Persian literature was 
enriched by translations of Sanskrit works. 
The Mahabharata was translated under 
horticulture. Apart from the many massive 

structures, the Mughals contributed many 
civil works of public utility, the greatest 
of them being the bridge over the Gomati 
river at Jaunpur. The most impressive feat 

is the West Yamuna Canal which provided 
water to Delhi.
Mughal architecture influenced 
even temple construction in different 
parts of the country. The temple of 

Govind Dev at Vrindavan near Mathura 
and Bir Singh™s temple of Chaturbhuj 
at Orchchaa (Madhya Pradesh) display 

Mughal influence. 
PaintingsThe Mughals achieved international 

recognition in the field of painting. 
Mughal miniatures are an important part 
of the museums of the world. Ancient 
Indian painting traditions kept alive in 
provinces like Malwa and Gujarat along 

with the central Asian influences created 
a deep impact in the world of painting. 
The masters of miniature painting, Abdu™s 

Samad and Mir Sayyid Ali, who had 
come to India from Central Asia along 
with Humayun inspired Indian painters. 
The primary objective of painting was 
to illustrate literary works. The Persian 

text of Mahabharata and Akbar Namah 
were illustrated with paintings by various 
painters. Daswant and Basawan were 
famous painters of Akbar™s court. European 
painting was introduced in Akbar™s court 

by Portuguese priests. During Jahangir™s 
time portrait painting and the painting 
of animals had developed. Mansur was a 

great name in this field. The great Dutch 
painter Rembrandt was influenced by 
Mughal miniatures. While Shah Jahan 
continued the tradition of painting, 
Aurangzeb™s indifference to painting led 

to dispersal of the painters to different 
parts of the country and thereby led to 
promotion of painting in the provinces.

52The greatest contribution in the 
field of literature during the Mughal 
rule was the development of Urdu as a 
common language of communication 
for people speaking different dialects. 
Regional languages acquired stability and 

maturity and some of the finest lyrical 
poetry was produced during this period. 
Abdur Rahim Khan-e-Khanan composed 

Bhakti poetry with a blend of Persian 
ideas of life and human relations in the 
Brij form of Hindi. Tulsidas who wrote 
in Awadhi, the Hindi dialect spoken 
in the eastern Uttar Pradesh, was very 

popular for his devotional ideals. Marathi 
literature had an upsurge due to the 
literary contribution of Eknath, Tukaram, 
Ramdas and Mukteshwar during this 
period. Eknath questioned the superiority 

of Sanskrit over other languages. The 
verses of Tukaram kindled monotheism. 
Mukteshwar composed Ramayana and 

Mahabharata in literary Marathi. 
Krishnadevaraya, the Vijayanagar 
ruler, through his Amuktamalyada (an epic 
poem on the Tamil woman poet, Andal) 
and his court Poet Allasani Peddana 

with his Manu Charitra were the leading 
beacons of Telugu literature during this 
period. Malayalam which had separated 
from Tamil as a language received a 
separate literary identity during this 

period. Ramayana and Mahabharata were 
composed in Malayalam. In Assamese 
language the tradition of Bhakti poetry 

was emulated by Shankara Deva who 
initiated a new literary tradition. Assamese 
literary works were produced in the fields 
of astronomy, arithmetic, and treatment 
of elephants and horses. Ramayana and 

Mahabharata were also retold in the 
Assamese language. The Chaitanya cult 
which portrayed the love of Krishna and 
Radha in poetic verses promoted Bengali 
literature. The Guru Granth Sahib, the 

holy book of the Sikhs compiled by 
Guru Arjun in which the verses of the 
the supervision of Abul Faizi, brother of 
Abul Fazal and a court poet of Akbar. The 
translation of Upanishads by Dara Shukoh, 
entitled Sirr-I-Akbar (the Great Secret), is 
a landmark. The Masnawis of Abul Faizi, 
Utbi and Naziri enriched Persian Poetry 

in India.
The Sanskrit works produced 
during the Mughal rule are impressive. 

Sanskrit literature of this period is noted 
for the kavyas and historical poetry. 
Rajavalipataka, a kavya, written by Prajna 
bhatta which completed the history of 
Kashmir belonged to reign of Akbar. 

Graeco-Arabic learning was transmitted 
to India through Persian works in the 
form of Sanskrit translations. Akbar™s 
astronomer Nilakantha wrote the Tajika 
Neelakanthi, an astrological treatise. Shah 

Jahan™s court poet Jaganatha Panditha 
wrote the monumental Rasagangadhara. 
Abul Fazl presenting Akbarnama
Dara Shukoh

53that tried to bridge di˝erences between 
the various Saivite sects. ˛e Christian 
missionaries like Roberto de Nobili and 
Constantine Joseph Beschi contributed 
much to Tamil language.
The empire the Mughals built at 
the national level made an everlasting 

impact on India as they knit the fragments 
into a single political unit, well aided 

by an effective central administration. 
Multiple identities also got synthesized in 
the process leading to the evolution of a 
unique culture that is Indian. 
Sikh Gurus as well as Shaikh Farid and 
other monotheists are a landmark in the 
evolution of Punjabi language.
During this period Tamil literature 
was dominated by Saivite and Vaishnavite 
literature. Kumaraguruparar, a great 

Saiva poet, is said to have visited Varanasi 
in the late seventeenth century. He 
composed important literary works such 
as Meenakshiammai Pillai Tamil and 
Neethineri Vilakkam. ˛ayumanavar wrote 

highly devotional verses with compassion for 
all humanity and he formulated a 
sanmarga
 SUMMARYThe three battles Babar fought to establish Mughal dynastic rule is described.
Humayun™s difficulties because of his brothers and hostility of Afghans and Bahadur 
Shah of Gujarat leading to the rise of Sur dynasty are explained.
Rise of Sher Shah and his revenue and fiscal measures are highlighted
Akbar™s mansabdari system and inclusive religious policy as well as consolidation 

of Mughal rule through military conquests, notably the second Battle of Panipat, 
are dealt with.   
Jahangir™s lack of interest in governance and Nur Jahan functioning as defacto ruler 
are discussed. 
The arrival of European trading companies and the trade centres established in 

Mughal India are detailed.
Shah Jahan™s Taj Mahal, epitome of Mughal architecture, and the war of succession 

fought among his three sons are elaborated.
The constant wars between Mughals led by Aurangzeb and Marathas represented 

by Shivaji along with Aurangzeb™s Rajput and Deccan policies are related.
The salient features of Mughal society with special reference to the evolution of 

a composite culture in India are examined, exploring the developments in socio-
economic and cultural spheres of life.

54EXERCISE I. Choose the correct answer
 1. Babur won the First Battle of Panipat in 1526 with the effective use of _____________
 a) Infantry 
 b) Cavalry
 c) Artillery
 d) Elephant corps  
 2. Battle of Ghagra was the last battle fought by Babur against_____________
 a) Afghans
 b) Rajputs
 c) Turks 
 d) Marathas
 3. _____________won the Battle of Chausa due to his superior political and military skills.
 a) Babur
 b) Humayun
 c) Sher khan
 d) Akbar
 4. _____________is a land tenure system in which the collection of the revenue of an estate 
and the power of governing it were bestowed upon on official of the state.
 a) Jagirdari
 b) Mahalwari
 c) Zamindari
 d) Mansabdari
 5. The fiscal administration of Akbar was largely based on the methods of ----------
 a) Babur
 b) Humayun
 c) Sher Shah
 d) Ibrahim Lodi
 6. _____________was executed by Jahangir for instigating prince Khusrau to rebel.
 a) Guru Arjan Dev
 b) Guru Har Gobind 
 c) Guru Tegh Bahadur 
 d) Guru Har Rai
 7. _____________ was the contemporary of Louis XIV of France.
 a) Akbar
 b) Jahangir
 c) Shah Jahan
 d) Aurangzeb
Akbar™s period, 1556 to 1605, was the period of great 
rulers. His nearest contemporary was Elizabeth of England. 
Shakespeare was living around this time. Henry IV of 
France, first ruler of the Bourbon dynasty, and Abbas the 
Great of Persia, the strongest ruler of the Safavid dynasty, 
were ruling their kingdoms during his period. The revolt 

of the Netherlands against Spanish rule in Europe that 
commenced during this period lasted for about eighty years 
and ended in 1648. 
Elsewhere in the World
Abbas the Great

55 8. _____________reimposed Jizya in his rule.
 a) Akbar
 b) Jahangir
 c) Shah Jahan
 d) Aurangzeb
 9. _____________ is the first known person in the world to have devised the ‚ship™s camel™, a 
barge on which a ship is built.
 a) Akbar
 b) Shah Jahan
 c) Sher Shah
 d) Babur
 10. The Shalimar Gardens of Jahangir and _____________ are watersheds in Indian 

horticulture.
 a) Akbar
 b) Shah Jahan
 c) Humayun
 d) Aurangzeb
 11. Tansen of _____________ was patronized by Akbar.
 a) Agra
 b) Gwalior 
 c) Delhi
 d) Mathura
 12. Padshah Namah was a biography of _____________
 a) Babur
 b) Humayun 
 c) Shah Jahan
 d) Akbar
 13. _____________ was an astrological treatise.
 a) Tajikanilakanthi
 b) Rasagangadhara
 c) Manucharita
 d) Rajavalipataka
 14. Meenakshiammai Pillai Tamil was composed by _____________.
 a) ˛ayumanavar
 b) Kumaraguruparar
 c) Ramalinga Adigal
 d) Sivappirakasar
 15. Which of the following rulers was not a contemporary of Akbar.
 a) Elizabeth of England
 b) Shakespeare
 c) Henry IV of France
 d) Queen Victoria of England
 II Find out the correct statement 
 A 1. Taj Mahal is the epitome of Mughal architecture, a blend of Indian, Persian and Islamic
 style.
 2. The new capital city of Akbar, Agra, enclosed within its wall several inspiring buildings.
 3. The Moti Masjid is made extensively of marble.
 4. The Purana Qila is a raised citadel.
 B 1. The Zat determined the number of soldiers each mansabdar received, ranging  from 10 to 

10000. 2. Sher Shah™s currency system became the basis of the coinage under the British.
 3. The Battle of Haldighati (1576) was the last pitched battle between the Mughal forces  and 

Rana Pratap Singh.
 4. The Guru Granth Sahib, the holy book of the Sikhs, was compiled by Guru Arjun Dev.

56 III From the following statements, find out the correct answer
 A (i) The ferocious march of Rana Sanga with a formidable force confronted the forces of Babur.
 (ii) After the battle of Kanauj, Akbar became a prince without a kingdom.
 (a)   (i) is correct.
 (b)   (ii) is correct.
 (c)   (i) and  (ii) are wrong.
 (d)    (i) and (ii) are correct.
 B (i) Sher Shah repaired the Grant Trunk Road from Indus in the west to Sonargaon in Bengal.
 (ii) Akbar laid the foundation for a great empire through his military conquests. 
 (a)  (i) is correct.
 (b)  (ii) is correct
 (c)   (i) and (ii) are correct 
 (d)  (i) and (ii) are wrong
 C  Assertion (A):
    Babur won the first Battle of Panipat.
  Reason (R):
    Babur used artillery in the battle.
  (a)   A is correct; R is the correct explanation of A.
  (b)   A is wrong; R is correct.
  (c)   A and  R is wrong.
  (d)   A is correct ; R is not the correct explanation  of A.
 D  Assertion (A):
 Towards the end of Aurangzeb™s reign, the Mughal empire began to 
disintegrate.
  Reason (R):
  Aurangzeb was friendly towards all Deccan rulers.
  
(a)  A is correct; R is not the correct explanation of A.
  
(b)  A is correct ; R is the correct explanation of A.
  
(c)   A is wrong and R is correct. 
  
(d)  A is correct ; R is the correct explanation of A. 
 IV.
 (A) Which of the following pairs is wrongly matched
 1. Bhaskaracharya
 - Neethineri Vilakkam
 2. Amuktamalyada
 - Krishnadevaraya
 3. Jagannatha Panditha
 - Rasagangadhara
 4. Allasani Peddana
 - Manucharita
  
(B) Match the following
 A. Abul Fazal
  - 1 Aurangzeb
 B. Jama Masjid
 - 2 Akbar
 C. Badshahi Mosque
 - 3 Sher Shah
 D. Purana Qila
 - 4 Shah Jahan
 (a)  2, 4, 1, 3 (b)  3, 2, 1, 4 (c)  3, 1, 4, 2 (d)  1, 3, 2, 4
57 V. Answer briefly
 1. What prompted Babur to invade India?
 2. How did Akbar deal with Bairam Khan?
 3. Write a short note on a) William Hawkins b) Sir Thomas Roe
 4. Nur Jahan was the power behind the throne during Jahangir™s reign Œ Explain.
 5. Which is called the epitome of Mughal architecture? Explain its structure.
 6. What were the three major uprisings against Aurangzeb in the North?
 7. Write a note on a) Sikhism b) Sufism.
 8. How did the Bhakti Saints become popular among the masses?
 9. Describe the development of Tamil language and literature during the Mughal period.
 10. ﬁThe Mughals achieved international recognition in the field of paintingﬂ Œ Elucidate.
 VI. Write a short note on each of the following
 1. ﬁHumayun stumbled out of his life as he 
stumbled through itﬂ Œ Explain.
 2.  What do you know of Din-i-llahi ?
 3. The siege of Chittor by Akbar.
 4. The Mansabdari system of Akbar.
 5. European factories established during 

the Mughal rule.
 6. Dara Shukoh  
 7. Kharkhanas
 8.  Kabir
 9. Abul Fazal
 10. Sufism
 VII. Answer in detail:
 1. ﬁSher Shah was the forerunner of Akbar in revenue administrationﬂ Œ Explain.
 2. Explain how Akbar™s religious policy was different from the religious policy of 
Aurangzeb.
 3. How did Aurangzeb™s Deccan policy ruin the Mughal empire?
 4. Analyze Mughal society in terms of its economy, trade and commerce.
 5. Attempt an essay on the splendour of Mughal architecture. 
 VIII Activities
 1. On the outline map of India, mark the following a) extent of Akbar™s empire b) 

extent of Aurangazeb™s empire.
 2. Prepare a timeline of Mughal period.
 3. Arrange for a debate on ﬁthe disintegration of the Mughal kingdom led to the 

establishment of European powers in Indiaﬂ.
 IX Assignments
 1. Preparing an album by collecting pictures related to Mughal architecture.
 2. Making a model of Taj Mahal
 3. Attempting a brief account of important battles fought by Mughals during the 

course of their rule, along with pictures from instagram. 

58GLOSSARYingenuity inventiveness, cleverness
 forsaking abandoningintrigue secret planning of something illicit, plotting traitorous disloyal, backstabbing  
emanating originate, derive, emerge 
shipwright ship builder lacqueware articles that have a decorative lacquer 

coating  reeler one who winds something on a reel   

cupolas a small dome, on the top of a larger 
dome, adorning a roof or ceiling Sources for the Study of Mughal EmpireS.No
Name of the Author
Work
Language 
Content
1.Babur
Tuzuk I Baburi
Turkish
Autobiography of Babur
2.Mirza Muhammad Haider 
(Cousin of emperor Babur)
Tarikh I Rashidi
Persian
History of Mughals of Central 

Asia
3.Gulbadan Begum Daughter 

of Babur
Humayun Namah
Persian
History of Humayun
4.Abbas Khan Sarwani
Tarikh I Sher Shahi
Persian
Describes the contest between 

Humayun and Sher Shah
5. Rizaqullah Mushtaqi
Waqiat I Mushtaqi
Persian
Elaborates on Sher Shah and 

Islam Shah
6.Firishta (in the service of 

Bijapur Sultan Aadil Shah II)
Tarikh I Firishta
Persian
History of Muhammedan 

Power in India till 1612.
7.Abul Fazal
Akbar Namah
Persian
History of Mughals with 

special emphasis on Akbar
8.Abul Fazal
Ain I Akbari
Persian
Administration of Akbar
9.Khwaja Nizamuddin 

Ahmad
Tabaqat I Akbari
Persian
Deals with Mughals up to  

Akbar.
10.Abdul Qadir Badauni 

(Member of Akbar™s Court
Muntakhab-Ut-

Tawarikh
Persian
General History of Muslims
11.Jahangir 
Tuzuk-i- Jahangiri
Persian
Autobiography
12.Mutamid Khan
Iqbal Namah
Persian 
Description of the Mughals
13.Abdul Hamid Lahori 
Padshah Namah
Persian
Describes first ten years of 

reign of Sha Jahan.

59  REFERENCES 1. Abraham Eraly, 
Emperors of the Peacock Throne: The Saga of The Great Mughals,
 Penguin 
Books, New Delhi, 1997.
 2. Irfan Habib, 
Medieval India, The Story of a Civilization
, National Book Trust, New Delhi, 
2007. 3. Stanely Lane-Poole, 
Medieval India under Mohammedan Rule (AD 712-1764),
 Delhi, 1963. 
 4. Satish Chandra
, Medieval India
, NCERT, New Delhi,
 5. Satish Chandra, 
History of Medieval India
, Orient BlackSwan, New Delhi, 2007
 6. R. Sathianathaier, 
A Political and Cultural History of India, Vol. II. 
Madras, 1980.
INTERNET RESOURCES 1. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mughal_Empire
 2. https://www.britannica.com/topic/Mughal-dynasty
 3. www.historyworld.net/wrldhis/PlainTextHistories.asp?historyid=ab99
 4. www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Mughal_Empire
 5. https://www.sscnet.ucla.edu/southasia/History/Mughals/mughals.html
 6. www.ncert.nic.in/NCERTS/l/gess104.pdf
TIME LINE (AD/CE)Battle of Panipat I
1526Battle of Khanwa
1527Battle of Chanderi
1528Battle of Ghagra
1529Death of Babur
1530Battle of Chausa
1539Battle of Kanauj
1540Death of Sher Shah
1545Battle of Panipat II
1556 Conquest of Gujarat by Akbar
1573 Battle of Haldighati
1576 Death of Akbar
1605 Death of Aurangzeb
1707
60THE MUGHAL EMPIRE
Let us create the timeline of 
Mughal Empire.
Procedure Step 1
 Type the URL or scan the QR code to open the activity page.
 Step 2
  
Organize the timeline by clicking ‚Time, Date, Event™. Then 
type ‚your name™ and ‚project name™™, Click the ‚START™ button.
 Step 3
  
Click the timeline (centre line) a window will open. Type 
the ‚Label™, ‚Short description™, ‚Full description™, and ‚choose 

image™ of the king. Then click the ‚ 
™ button.
  Step 4
  
Similarly create for other rulers. Click the ‚Finish™ button.
 Step 5
  
Save ‚final™ in the location that you need. 
URL:http://www.readwritethink.org/files/resources/interactives/timeline_2/
ICT CORNER
Step4
Step3
Step2
Step1
Pictures are indicative only
* if browser requires allow Flash Player or Java Script.

61IntroductionThe Marathas played a major role in 
the decline of Mughal power. Under the 
dynamic leadership of Shivaji, they posed 
a strong challenge to Mughal power 
during the 1670s. By the middle of the 18
th century, they had succeeded in displacing 

Mughal power in central India. Nayak 
rule ended in 1674 in Thanjavur, when the 
Maratha General Venkoji (half brother of 
Shivaji) leading the Bijapur forces invaded 

Thanjavur and succeeded in establishing 
Maratha rule in the Tamil region. Maratha 
rule in Thanjavur which started from 

1674 continued until the death of Serfoji 
II in 1832. 
15.1  
Causes of the Rise of the Marathas(a)  Physical features and Nature of the PeopleThe region of the Marathas consisted of 
a narrow strip of land called Konkan. 
Its precipitous mountains, inaccessible 
valleys and impregnable hill-forts were 
most favourable for military defence. 
The Marathas claimed a long tradition of 
military prowess and prided themselves 
on their loyalty, courage, discipline, 
cunningness, and endurance. They had 

earlier served under the Bahmani Sultans 
and later, after its disintegration, under 
the Sultans of Ahmadnagar, Bijapur, 

Golconda, Bidar and Berar. 
Marathas avoided direct battles 
with the Mughal armies that were 

equipped with strong cavalry and deadly 
cannons. "Guerrilla warfare" was their 
strength. They possessed the ability to 
plan and execute the surprise lightning 
attacks at night. Further, they exhibited 

skills to change their tactics according to 
the battle situation without waiting for 
orders from a superior officer. 
(b)  Bhakti Movement and its ImpactThe spread of the Bhakti movement 

inculcated the spirit of oneness among 
The Marathas 15Lesson
Learning ObjectivesTo acquire knowledge in
Objective conditions that facilitated the rise of Marathas
Shivaji™s contribution to the establishment of Maratha kingdom
Shivaji™s administrative system
Peshwa rule and Peshwa administration
Maratha in Tamilnadu with special reference to Serfoji II

62the Marathas. Tukaram, 
Ramdas, and Eknath were 
the leading lights of the 
movement. The hymns 
of the Bhakti saints were 
sung in Marathi and they 

created a bond among 
people across the society. 
(c) External causesThe degeneration of Bijapur and Golkonda 
prompted the Marathas to unite and 
fight together. The Deccan wars against 
the Sultans of Bijapur, Golkonda and 
Ahmednagar had exhausted the Mughal 
treasury. Shivaji rallied the Marathas who 

lay scattered in many parts of Deccan 
under his leadership and built a mighty 
kingdom, with Raigad as the capital.
15.2. Shivaji (1627Œ1680)Shivaji was born in Shivner near Junnar. 

He was the son of Shahji Bhonsle by his 
first wife Jijabai. Shahji was a descendant 
of the Yadava rulers of Devagiri from his 
mother™s side and the Sisodias of Mewar 
on his father™s side. Shahji Bhonsle served 

under Malik Ambar (1548Œ1626), former 
slave, and the Abyssinian minister of 
Ahmed Shah of Ahmednagar. After the 

death of Malik Ambar, Shahji played a vital 
role in its politics. After the annexation of 
Ahmednagar by the Mughals, he entered 
the service of the Sultan of Bijapur. 
Shivaji and his mother were left under 
the care of Dadaji Kondadev who 
administered Shahji Bhonsle™s jagirs (land 

grants given in recognition of military 
or administrative services rendered)   at 
Poona. Shivaji earned the goodwill of the 

Mavali peasants and chiefs, who were 
a martial people with knowledge about 
the hilly areas around Poona. Shivaji 

made himself familiar with the hilly areas 
around Poona. Religious heads, Ramdas 
and Tukaram, also influenced Shivaji. 
Ramdas was regarded by Shivaji as his 
guru.
Military ConquestsShivaji began his military career at the 

age of nineteen. In 1646, he captured 
the fortress of Torna from the Sultan of 
Bijapur. The fort of Raigad, located five 

miles east of Torna, was captured and 
wholly rebuilt. After the death of Dadaji 
Kondadev in 1647, Shivaji took over all the 

jagirs of his father. Subsequently, the forts 
of Baramati, Indapura, Purandhar and 
Kondana came under his direct control. 
The Marathas had already captured 
Kalyan, an important town in that region.
Shivaji™s father had been humiliated 
and imprisoned by the Sultan of Bijapur. 

He negotiated with Prince Murad, the 
Ramdas
 ﬁ˜e religious revival [in Maratha 
country] was not Brahmanicalﬂ in its 
orthodoxy, it was heterodox in its spirit of 

protest against forms, ceremonies and class 

distinctions. ˜e saints sprang chie˚y from 

the lower order of the society other than 

Brahmins. Œ Justice Ranade.
Shivaji

63Shivaji was recognised as the ruler of the 
territories in his possession.
Shivaji and the MughalsIn July 1658, Aurangzeb ascended the 

throne as the Emperor. Shaista Khan was 
appointed the Governor of the Deccan in 
1660 with the main purpose of crushing 
Shivaji. Shivaji hit upon a bold plan. He 
entered Poona at night with 400 soldiers in 

the form of a marriage party and attacked 
the home of Shaista Khan. Aurangzeb was 
forced to recall Shaista Khan from the 

Deccan in December 1663. 
Shivaji and JaisinghIn 1664, Shivaji attacked Surat, the major 

Mughal port in Arabian Sea and his soldiers 
plundered the city. Aurangzeb despatched 
an army under the command of the Rajput 
general Raja Jai Singh to defeat Shivaji and 
annex Bijapur. At that time, Prince Muazzam, 

later Bahadur Shah I, was the Governor of 
the Deccan. Jai Singh made elaborate plans 
to encircle Shivaji on all sides. Even Raigarh 

was under threat.  Purandar was besieged in 
June 1665. ˜e heroic resistance of Shivaji 
became futile. ˜erfore he decided to come 
to negotiate with Jai Singh. According to the 
treaty of Purandar signed on 11 June 1665 

Shivaji yielded the fortresses that he had 
captured and agreed to serve as a mansabdar 
and assist the Mughals in conquering 
Bijapur. 
Shivaji and Jai Singh
Mughal Viceroy of the Deccan and 
expressed his wish to join Mughal service. 
The Sultan of Bijapur released Shahji 
in 1649 on some conditions. So, Shivaji 
refrained from his military activities 
from 1649 to 1655. During this period, he 

consolidated his power and toned up his 
administration.
In 1656, Shivaji re-started his 
military activities. He captured Javli in 

the Satara district and the immense booty 
that he won made him popular among the 
Marathas. Many young men joined his 
army. A new fort, Pratapgarh, was built 

two miles west of Javli. 
Confrontation against BijapurAfter Mohammad Adilshah of Bijapur 

died in November 1656, Adilshah II, a 
young man of eighteen, succeeded him. 
Aurangzeb captured Bidar, Kalyani and 
Parinder in 1657. So, both Shivaji and the 
Bijapur Sultan were forced to make peace 

with Aurangzeb. At this time Shah Jahan fell 
ill, and a war of succession was imminent 
in Delhi. Aurangzeb left for Delhi to take 

part in it. Using this opportunity, Shivaji 
invaded north Konkan and captured the 
cities of Kalyan, Bhivandi and fort of 
Mahuli.
Shivaji and Afzal Khan, 1659As there was no danger from the Mughals, 
Bijapur Sultan decided to attack Shivaji. 
Afzal Khan was sent with a huge army. 
He boasted that he would bring the 
ﬁmountain-ratﬂ in chains. But, he found 
fighting in the mountainous country 

extremely difficult. So, he planned to 
trick Shivaji but he was outwitted. The 
Maratha forces ravaged South Konkan and 

Kolhapur district and captured the fort of 
Panhala. The Sultan of Bijapur himself 
led the army and the war dragged on for 
more than a year. Nothing substantial 
was gained. Finally, after negotiations, 

64Raigad Fort
Deccan CampaignsIn 1676, Shivaji began his career of 
conquests in the south. A secret treaty 
was signed with the Sultan of Golkonda. 

Shivaji promised him some territories 
in return for his support. He captured 
Senji and Vellore and annexed the 
adjoining territories which belonged to 

his father, Shahji. He allowed his half-
brother Venkoji or Ekoji to carry on 
administering Thanjavur. The Nayaks 
of Madurai promised a huge amount as 
tribute. The Carnatic campaigns added 

glory and prestige to Shivaji. Senji, the 
newly conquered place, acted as the 
second line of defence for his successors.
Last days of ShivajiShivaji™s last days were not happy. His 

eldest son Sambhaji deserted him and 
joined the Mughal camp. Although he 
returned, he was imprisoned and sent to 

Panhala fort. The relentless campaigns 
affected Shivaji™s health. He died in 1680 
at the age of 53.
At the time of his death, Shivaji™s 
kingdom comprised the Western Ghats and 

the Konkan between Kalyan and Goa. The 
provinces in the south included western 
Karnataka extending from Belgaum to the 

bank of Tungabhadra. Vellore, Senji and a 
few other districts were not settled at the 
time of his death.
Visit to AgraJai Singh persuaded Shivaji to visit the 

Mughal court. He fed Shivaji with high 
hopes and took personal responsibility 
for his safety at the capital. Shivaji and his 
son Sambhaji reached Agra in May 1666. 
But, they were not shown due respect. 

Humiliated, he burst out and abused the 
Emperor. When Shivaji was imprisoned, 
he managed to escape. 
In 1666, Shivaji resumed his 
belligerent policy and led Maratha 

soldiers in new conquests. As the Mughals 
were busy with the Afghan risings in the 
North-West, they could not deal with 

Shivaji. Shivaji also occupied himself 
with the re-organisation of his internal 
administration. Prince Muazzam, Viceroy 
of the Deccan, was weak and indolent. 
Raja Jaswant Singh was friendly towards 

Shivaji. Sambhaji was also made a 
mansabdar of 5000. 
Aurangzeb took back a part of the jagir 
in Berar which was once given to Shivaji. 
Shivaji got annoyed and recalled his 
troops from Mughal service. He recovered 
almost all the forts 
he had ceded to the 

Mughals by the treaty 
of Purandar. In 1670, 
he again sacked Surat, 

the most important 
port on the western 
coast. In 1672, the 
Marathas imposed 
chauth
  or one fourth 
of the revenue as 
annual tribute on Surat.
CoronationOn 6 June 1674, Shivaji was crowned 
at Raigad. He assumed the title of 
ﬁChhatrapathiﬂ( metaphor for ﬁsupreme 
king ﬂ).
Aurangzeb

65Bai. Acting on behalf of his infant son, she 
despatched an army of 50,000 horsemen 
and infantry to Hyderabad. The capital 
was plundered and, as a result, trade in 
Masulipatnam, the major port of the 
region, remained disrupted for years. At 

the time of Aurangzeb™s death in 1707 
Marathas still had many fortified places 
under their control.
After Aurangzeb™s death, Sambhaji™s 
son Shahu was released from prison and 
claimed the Maratha throne. Tara Bai 
objected and it led to a civil war, in which 

Shahu emerged victorious and ascended 
the throne in 1708. Balaji Viswanath was 
very supportive of Shahu and helped 

him ascend to the throne in 1708.  As a 
gesture of his gratitude Shahu appointed 
Balaji Viswanath as the Peshwa in 1713.  
In course of time, the Peshwa became the 
real ruler.  Shahu retired to Satara and the 

Peshwa started to rule from Poona. 
15.3 Marathas after ShivajiA year after the death of Shivaji, his eldest 

son and successor Sambhaji led a Maratha 
army into Mughal territory, captured 
Bahadurpur in Berar, and plundered its 
wealth. Provoked by this humiliation, 
Aurangzeb struck a compromise with 

the Mewar Rajputs and led an army into 
the Deccan. Bijapur and Golkonda were 
annexed in 1686 and 1687 respectively. 

The next task of Aurangzeb was to punish 
Sambhaji for giving protection to his 
rebellious son Prince Akbar. In 1689 the 
Mughal forces captured Sambhaji and 
killed him. 
Sambhaji™s death did not deter the 
Marathas. His younger brother Rajaram 
renewed the fight from the fortress of 
Senji in the Tamil country. The fight 

continued for many years. After the death 
of Rajaram in 1700, resistance continued 
under the leadership of his widow, Tara 
Map not to scaleNSWEMarathas SuratMAHARASHTRAMBAY OFBENGALARABIANSEAINDIAN OCEANSri lankaDiuMumbaiRatnagiriGoaKarwarCalicutTiruchiThanjavurVelloreChennai
KolarBellariBelgamSolapurGodavari
AhmednagarAurangabadNagpurDamanPoona
RajgiriPrathapgarh
Satara 
HyderabadKochiKollamArniSenji
VaraingipettaiKingdom of ShivajiBangalore

66The 
Amatya
 or finance minister 
checked and countersigned all public 
accounts of the kingdom. 
The 
Walkia-Nawis 
or Mantri 
maintained the records of the king™s 

activities and the proceedings in the 
court.
Summant
 or Dabir or foreign secretary 
was to advise king on all matters of war 
and peace and to receive ambassadors 
and envoys from other countries. 
Sachiv
 or Shuru Nawis or home 
secretary was to look after the 
correspondence of the king with the 
power to revise the drafts.  He also 
checked the accounts of the Parganas.
Pandit Rao 
or Danadhyaksha or Sadar 
and Muhtasib or ecclesiastical head 

was in charge of religion, ceremonies 
and charities.  He was the judge of 
canon law and censor of public morals.
Nyayadhish
 or chief justice was 
responsible for civil and military 

justice.
Sari Naubat
 or commander-in-chief was 
in charge of recruitment, organization 

and discipline of the Army. 
With the exception of the 
Nyayadhish and Pandit Rao, all the other 
ministers were to command armies and 

lead expeditions.  All royal letters, charters 
and treaties had to get the seal of the King 
and the Peshwa and the endorsement 
of the four ministers other than the 
Danadyksha, Nyayadhisha and Senapati.  

There were eighteen departments under 
the charge of the various ministers. 
Provincial GovernmentFor the sake of administrative convenience, 
Shivaji divided the kingdom into four 
provinces, each under a viceroy.  The 
provinces were divided into a number of 
Tara Bai carried on a parallel rival 
government with Kolhapur as capital. But 

Raja Bai, the second wife of Rajaram and 
her son Sambhaji II imprisoned Tara Bai 
and her son in 1714. Sambhaji II ascended 
the throne of Kolhapur. However he had 
to accept the overlordship of Shahu. After 

Shahu died in 1749, Rama Raja who 
ascended the throne, made a pact with the 
Peshwa, according to which he became a 

titular head. Tara Bai was disappointed. 
Tara Bai and Rama Raja died in 1761 and 
1777 respectively. Shahu II, the adopted 
son of Rama Raja, ruled till his death in 
1808 as a nonentity. His son Pratap Singh 

who came to the throne next was deposed 
by the British government in 1839 on 
the charge that he 
plotted against the 
British Government. 

Pratap Singh died as a 
prisoner in 1847. His 
younger brother Shaji 

Appa Saheb, Shaji II, 
was made king by the 
British in 1839. Shahji 
II died in 1848 without 
a successor.
15.4  
Maratha AdministrationCentral GovernmentShivaji was a not only a great warrior 

but a good administrator too. He had 
an advisory council to assist him in his 
day-to-day administration.  This council 
of eight ministers was known as 
Ashta
 Pradhan
.  Its functions were advisory.  
The eight ministers were:
The Mukhya Pradhan or 
Peshwa
 or 
prime minister whose duty was to look 

after the general welfare and interests 
of the State. He officiated for the king 
in his absence.
Tara Bai

67Military OrganizationShivaji organized a standing army.  As we 
have seen, he discouraged the practice 
of granting jagirs and making hereditary 
appointments.  Quarters were provided 
to the soldiers.  The soldiers were given 
regular salaries.   The army consisted 

of four divisions: infantry, cavalry, an 
elephant corps and artillery.  Though the 
soldiers were good at guerrilla methods 

of warfare, at a later stage they were also 
trained in conventional warfare.
˜e infantry was divided into 
regiments, brigades and divisions.  ˜e 
smallest unit with nine soldiers was headed 

by a Naik (corporal). Each unit with 25 
horsemen was placed under one havildar 
(equivalent to the rank of a sergeant). 
Over ˛ve havildars were placed under one 
jamaladar and over ten jamaladars under 

one hazari.  Sari Naubat was the supreme 
commander of cavalry. ˜e cavalry was 
divided into two classes: the bargirs (soldiers 

whose horses were given by the state) and 
the shiledars (mercenary horsemen who 
had to ˛nd their own horses). ˜ere were 
water-carriers and farriers too. 
JusticeThe administration of justice was of 
a rudimentary nature.  There were no 
regular courts and regular procedures. The 
panchayats functioned in the villages.  The 
system of ordeals was common.  Criminal 
cases were tried by the Patels.  Appeals in 

both civil and criminal cases were heard 
by the 
Nyayadhish 
(chief justice) with the 
guidance of the 
smritis
. Hazir Majlim 
was 
the final court of appeal
15.5
(1713-1818)The Peshwa or the prime minister was the 
foremost minister in the 
Ashta Pradhan,
 Pranths.  The practice of granting jagirs 
was abandoned and all officers were 
paid in cash.  Even when the revenues of 

a particular place were assigned to any 
official, his only link was with the income 
generated from the property.  He had no 

control over the people associated with 
it.  No office was to be hereditary.   The 
fort was the nerve-centre of the activities 
of the Pranth.  The lowest unit of the 
government was the village in which 

the traditional system of administration 
prevailed.
Revenue SystemThe revenue administration of Shivaji was 
humane and beneficent to the cultivators.  
The lands were carefully surveyed and 
assessed.  The state demand was fixed at 
30% of the gross produce to be payable 
in cash or kind. Later, the tax was raised 

to 40%.  The amount of money to be 
paid was fixed.  In times of famine, the 
government advanced money and grain 

to the cultivators which were to be paid 
back in instalments later.  Liberal loans 
were also advanced to the peasants for 
purchasing cattle, seed, etc.
Chauth and SardeshmukhiAs the revenue collected from the state 
was insufficient to meet its requirements, 
Shivaji collected two taxes, 
Chauth
 and 
Sardeshmukhi
, from the adjoining 
territories of his empire, the Mughal 
provinces and the territories of the Sultan 

of Bijapur. 
Chauth
 was one-fourth of the 
revenue of the district conquered by the 

Marthas. 
Sardeshmukhi
 was an additional 
10% of the revenue which Shivaji collected 
by virtue of his position as Sardeshmukh.  
Sardeshmukh was the superior head of 
many Desais or Deshmukhs.  Shivaji 
claimed that he was the hereditary 

Sardeshmukh of his country.

68the sovereignty of Shahu. Thana, Salsette 
and Bassein were captured from the 
Portuguese in 1738 and they were driven 
out of the Konkan coast.  At the same time, 
the English made friendly overtures to the 
Marathas and got the right to free trade in 

the Deccan region.
Baji Rao I
Balaji Baji Rao (1740Œ1761)Balaji Baji Rao succeeded as the Peshwa 

after the death of his father Baji Rao. 
Known as Nana Sahib, he proved to be 
a good administrator and an expert in 
handling financial matters. 
Balaji Baji Rao
Carnatic ExpeditionChanda Sahib, son-in-law of the Nawab 
of Arcot, after capturing Tiruchirappalli 
threatened to lay siege to Thanjavur.  Its 
the council of ministers of Shivaji.  The 
Peshwas gained more powers and became 
dominant in the eighteenth Century.  
Balaji Viswanath was the first powerful 
Peshwa.
Peshwa is a Persian word which means 
ﬁForemostﬂ or the ﬁFirst Ministerﬂ.
Balaji Viswanath (1713Œ1720) Balaji Viswanath assisted the Maratha 
emperor Shahu to consolidate his control 
over the kingdom that had been plagued 
by a civil war. Kanhoji Angre was the most 
powerful naval chief 

on the western coast.  
During the civil war 

Kanhoji had supported 
Tarabai.  The Peshwa 
convinced him of the 
common danger from 
the Europeans and 

secured his loyalty to 
Shahu.
The practice of granting jagirs was 
revived. And the office of Peshwa was 
made hereditary.
Baji Rao I (1720Œ1740)After Balaji Viswanath, his son Baji Rao I 

was appointed Peshwa in 1720 by Shahu.  
Baji Rao enhanced the power and prestige 
of the Maratha Empire by defeating the 

Nizam of Hyderabad, the Rajput Governor 
of Malwa and the Governor of Gujarat. 
He freed Bundelkhand from the control 

of Mughals and for this the Marathas got 
one third of the territories from its ruler. 
The commander-in-chief, Trimbak Rao, 
who troubled the Peshwa, was defeated 
and killed in the battle of Dabhai near 

Baroda in 1731. And the Peshwa assumed 
the office of the commander-in-chief also. 
By the treaty of Warna signed in 1731, 
Sambhaji of Kolhapur was forced to accept 
Balaji 
 Viswanath

69The Marathas tried to find allies 
among the powers in the north-west.  But 
their earlier deeds had antagonized all of 
them. The Sikhs, Jat chiefs and Muslims did 
not trust them.  The Marathas did not help 
Siraj-ud-Daulah in the battle of Plassey 

in 1757. So no help was forthcoming 
from Bengal either. A move on the part 
of the Peshwa against the British, both 

in Karnataka and Bengal, would have 
probably checked their advance.  But the 
Peshwa™s undue interests in Delhi earned 
the enmity of various regional powers. 
Ahmad Shah Abdali brought about the 

disaster at Panipat in 1761. 
The Third Battle of Panipat, 1761The third battle of Panipat, 1761 is one of 

the decisive battles in the history of India.  
The defeat in the battle dealt a severe blow 
to the Marathas and the Mughal Empire 
and thereby paved the way for the rise of 
the British power in India. 
Circumstances˜e tottering Mughal Empire neglected the 

defence of the North-West frontier areas. 
˜is prompted Nadir Shah, the then ruler 
of Afghanistan, to invade India.  In spite 
of his repeated demands, the Mughal ruler, 
Muhammad Shah, provided asylum to the 

Afghan rebels.  So, his invasions started in 
1739.  Delhi was plundered.  ˜e Kohinoor 
diamond and the valuable peacock throne 

were taken away by Nadir Shah.
When Nadir Shah was assassinated 
in 1747, one of his military generals, 
Ahmad Shah Abdali became an 
independent ruler of Afghanistan.  After 

consolidating his position, he started his 
military expeditions. The Mughal emperor 
made peace with him by ceding Multan 
and the Punjab.  Mir Mannu, appointed 
by the Mughal Emperor as the governor 

of Punjab, was to act only as an agent of 
Maratha ruler appealed to Shahu for help 
in 1739.  Responding to this appeal, the 
Peshwa sent Raghoji Bhonsle (Sahu™s 

brother-in-law) to Thanjavur.  Raghoji 
Bhonsle defeated and killed the Nawab of 
Arcot, Dost Ali, in 1740. Tiruchirappalli was 
captured and Chanda Sahib imprisoned. 
As the Peshwa was subsequently engaged 

in military expeditions in Bundelkhand 
and Bengal, Mohammed Ali, who 
succeeded Dost Ali, could easily retake 

Arcot and recapture Tiruchirappalli in 
1743. The Peshwa then sent his cousin 
Sadasiva Rao to the Carnatic.  Although 
the authority of the Marathas was re-
established, Tiruchirappalli could not be 

regained. 
Battle of Udgir, 1760A war of succession broke out after 

the death of Nizam Asaf Jah in 1748.  
Peshwa supported the eldest son of the 
Nizam. The army sent by Peshwa under 
Sadasiva Rao won the battle of Udgir in 
1760.  This success marked the climax of 

Maratha military might.  The Peshwa took 
over Bijapur, Aurangabad, Dulatabad, 
Ahmadnagar and Burhanpur.  
The Marathas had brought 
Rajaputana under their domination 

after six expeditions between 1741 and 
1748.  In 1751 the Nawab of Bengal had 
to cede Orissa and pay an annual tribute 

to the Marathas. As the Marathas were 
always after the Mughal throne they 
entered Delhi in 1752 to drive out the 
Afghans and Rohillas from Delhi. Imad-
ul-Mulk who was made the Wazir with 

the help of Marathas became a puppet in 
their hands.  After bringing the Punjab 
under their control, they expelled the 

representative of Ahmad Shah Abdali, 
the founder of the Durani Empire in 
Afghanistan. A major conflict with 
Ahmad Shah Abdali became therefore 
inevitable. 

70command, however, was in the hands of 
Sadasiva Rao.  On their way, they were 
joined by the Holkar, Scindia and Gaikwar.  
Around this time, Alamgir II, the Mughal 
Emperor had been assassinated and his 
eldest son crowned himself as Shah Alam 

II.  But the Wazir who manoeuvred the 
assassination enthroned Shah Jahan III. 
Sadasiva Rao intruded and deposed Shah 

Jahan III and proclaimed Shah Alam II as 
Emperor.
  After the preliminaries were 
settled, Sadasiva Rao, instead of attacking 

the forces of Abdali, remained quiet for 
a long time, until the scarcity of food 
became acute. Abdali stationed his troops 
in the fertile 
doab
 from where he could get 
food without interruption.  
Effects of the Battle of PanipatThe third battle of Panipat was fought 
on 14 January 1761.  The Maratha army 
was completely routed.  The Peshwa™s son 
Viswas Rao, Sadasiva Rao and numerous 
Maratha commanders were killed. Holkar 
fled and the contingents of Scindia 

followed him. The Peshwa was stunned by 
the tragic news. The Peshwa died broken 
hearted in June 1761.
After the battle of Panipat, Abdali 
recognized Shah Alam II as the Emperor 

of Delhi. He got an annual tribute. The 
Marathas, though they received a severe 
blow initially, managed to restore their 

power within ten years in the north by 
becoming the guardian of the Mughal 
Emperor Shah Alam.  
 (1761Œ1772) and His SuccessorsIn 1761, Madhav Rao, the son of Balaji 
Baji Rao, became the Peshwa under the 
regency of  Raghoba, the younger brother 
of Peshwa.
 Madhav Rao tried to regain 
the Maratha power which was lost in the 
battle of Panipat.  In 1763 a fierce battle was 
Ahmad Shah Abdali. On Mir Mannu™s 

death, the widow of Mir Mannu, with the 

help of the Wazir of Delhi, Imad-ul-Mulk, 
appointed Mir Munim as the Governor 
of the Punjab, without the consent of 
Abdali. Infuriated by this move Abdali 
invaded India and captured the Punjab.  

Mir Munim fled to Delhi.  Pursuing him 
Abdali captured Delhi and pillaged it in 
January 1757.  Mathura and Brindavan 

were desecrated.
Before leaving Delhi, Abdali 
appointed Mir Bakshi as his agent in 
Delhi. Timur Shah, his son, was made the 
Viceroy of Lahore. An expedition under 

Malhar Rao Holkar and Raghunatha Rao 
reached Delhi after Abdali had left.  They 
removed the agent of Abdali at Delhi and 
appointed a man of their choice as the 
Wazir.  Thereafter they captured Sirhind 

and Lahore in 1758.  The Afghan forces 
were defeated, and Timur Shah deposed.  
So, Abdali returned to India in 
October 1759 and recovered the Punjab.  

The Marathas were forced to withdraw 
from Lahore, Multan and Sirhind.  The 
wildest anarchy prevailed in the region.  
So, the Peshwa sent Dattaji Scindia, the 

brother of Mahadhaji Scindia, to the 
Punjab to set matters right. But Abdali 
defeated and killed him in the battle 
(1760). Malhar Rao Holkar was also 
defeated at Sikandara.  Thereupon the 

Peshwa recruited a huge army under the 
command of Sadasiva Rao.
Abdali responded by forming 
an alliance with Najib-ud-Daulah of 

Rohilkhand and Shuja-ud-Daulah of 
Oudh.  The Marathas could not find 
allies among the northern powers, as they 
had already alienated from the Nawab of 

Oudh, the Sikh and Jat chiefs and gained 
the distrust of the Rajputs.
The Maratha army was under 
the nominal command of Vishwas Rao, 
the young son of the Peshwa.  The real 

71As Mahadaji  Scindia and the Bhonsle of 
Nagpur turned pro-British, the Marathas 
had to concede Thane and Salsette to 
the latter. By the treaty of Salbai, in 
1782, Ragunath Rao was pensioned off. 
Following this, peace prevailed between 

the Company and the Marathas for about 
two decades.  
Anglo-Maratha War
(b)  
The Second Anglo-Maratha War (1803-1806)˜e death of Nana Fadnavis resulted in a 
scramble for his huge possessions.  Peshwa 
Baji Rao II was dethroned. In the then trying 
circumstances, he had to accept the help of 
the British. Wellesley, the then Governor 
General, forced the Subsidiary Alliance on 

the Peshwa. ˜e treaty of Bassein was signed 
in 1802. According to the treaty the territory 
to be ceaded should fetch an income of 
 Rs. 26 Lakhs. ˜e leading Maratha States 
regarded the treaty as humiliating and 
hence decided to defy it. So the second 
Anglo-Maratha war broke out.  In spite of 
the brave resistance put up by the Marathas, 

the Maratha leaders were completely routed. 
˜e Subsidiary Alliance was accepted. ˜e 
British got Doab, Ahmadnagar, Broach and 
all of the hilly regions.
fought with the Nizam of Hyderabad. His 
expeditions (1765Œ1767) against Haider 
Ali of Mysore were successful. However 
Haider Ali soon recovered almost all his 
lost territories.  But Madhav Rao regained 
them in 1772 and Haider Ali was forced to 
sign a humiliating treaty. 
The Peshwa reasserted control over 
northern India by defeating the Rohillas 

(Pathans) and subjugating the Rajput 

states and Jat Chiefs.  Shah Alam II, the 
fugitive Emperor, was in Allahabad under 
the protection of the British.  In 1771, the 
Marathas brought him back to Delhi.  The 
Emperor ceded Kora and Allahabad to 

them. But the sudden death of Peshwa in 
1772 brought an end to his glorious career.
As Madhav Rao I had no sons, his 
younger brother Narayan Rao became 
Peshwa in 1772. But he was murdered 

the next year.  His posthumous son 
Sawai Madhav Rao (Madhav Rao II) 
was proclaimed Peshwa on the 40
th day 
of his birth.  After the death of Madhav 
Rao II, Baji Rao II, the son of Raghunath 
Rao became the Peshwa and was the last 
Peshwa.  
15.6  
The Anglo-Maratha 
Wars(a)  
The First Anglo Maratha War (1775-1782)Madhav Rao Narayan 
was an infant Peshwa 
under the regency of 
Nana Fadnavis. The 
usurping of power by 
Ragunath Rao, uncle 

of the former Peshwa Madhava Rao I, 
provided the scope for the Company 
administration to fish in the troubled 

waters. The Company administration 
in Bombay supported Ragunath Rao in 
return for getting Salsette and Bassein.  

72The Maratha Confederacy organised 
by Baji Rao I comprising Bhonsle, 
Holkar and Scindia was dissolved.
Mountstuart Elphinstone, who had 
been Resident at Poona, became 
Governor of Bombay.
15.7  
Maratha Administration under ˜e Peshwa was one of the Ashta Pradhan 
of Shivaji.  ˜is o˝ce was not a hereditary 
one.  As the power and prestige of the king 
declined, the Peshwas rose to prominence.  
˜e genius of Balaji Vishwanath (1713-1720) 
made the o˝ce of the Peshwa supreme and 

hereditary.  ˜e Peshwas virtually controlled 
the whole administration, usurping 
the powers of the king. ˜ey were also 

recognized as the religious head of the state. 
Central SecretariatThe centre of the Maratha administration 

was the Peshwa Secretariat at Poona. It 
dealt with the revenues and expenditure of 
all the districts, the accounts submitted by 
the village and district officials. The pay 
and rights of all grades of public servants 

and the budgets under civil, military and 
religious heads were also handled.  The 
daily register recorded all revenues, all 

grants and the payments received from 
foreign territories.  
ProvincesProvinces under the Peshwas were of 
various sizes.  Larger provinces were 
under the provincial governors called 
Sar-
subahdars
.  The divisions in the provinces 
were termed 
Subahs
 and 
Pranths
. The 
Mamlatdar and Kamavistar were Peshwa™s 
representatives in the districts.  They 
were responsible for every branch of 
district administration. 
Deshmukhs
 and 
(c)  
The Third Anglo-Maratha War (1817-1819)Peshwa Baji Rao II became anti-British, as 

the prime minister of the Gaikwar (ruler) 
of Baroda Gangadhar Sastri was killed 
by Trimbakji, a favourite of Peshwa.  At 
the instance of the Resident at Poona, 
Mountstuart Elphinstone, Trimabakji 

was imprisoned. The murderer however 
managed to escape from the prison with 
the assistance of the Peshwa. Peshwa was 

also charged with creating the Maratha 
confederacy and plotting with Scindia, 
Bhonsle and Holkar against the British. 
So, the British forced the Peshwa to sign a 
new treaty at Poona in 1817.  Accordingly, 
The Peshwa resigned the headship of 

the Maratha confederacy.
Ceded Konkan to the British and 

recognised the independence of the 
Gaikwar.
Baji Rao was not reconciled to this 
humiliation. So when the British were 
busily engaged in the suppression of the 
Pindaris, Baji Rao II burnt down the Poona 

Residency. General Smith rushed to Poona 
and captured it, with the Peshwa ˚eeing to 
Satara, which was also captured by General 
Smith.  Baji Rao ˚ed from place to place. 
General Smith defeated his forces at Ashta, 

Kirkee and Korgaon. Finally, Baji Rao 
surrendered to Elphinstone in 1818.
Outcome of the Third Anglo-Maratha WarThe British abolished the Peshwai 
(office of the Peshwa) and annexed all 
the Peshwa™s dominions. But the jagirs 
of the fief holders were restored.
Until his death in 1851 Baji Rao II 

remained a prisoner with an annual 
pension.
Pratap Singh, a descendent of Shivaji, 
was made the king of a small kingdom 
carved around Satara. 

73rule.  The Peshwas followed the system 
of tax farming.  Land was settled against 
a stipulated amount to be paid annually 
to the government. The fertility the 
land was assessed for fixation of taxes.  
Income was derived from the forests. 

Permits were given on the payment of a 
fee for cutting trees and using pastures.  
Revenue was derived even from the sale 

of grass, bamboo, fuel wood, honey and 
the like.
The land revenue assessment 
was based on a careful survey. Land was 
divided into three classes: according to the 

kinds of the crops, facilities for irrigation, 
and productivity of the land.  The villagers 
were the original settlers who acquired the 
forest.  They could not be deprived of their 
lands.  But only the Patel could represent 

their rights to the higher authorities.
Other sources of revenue were 
Chauth and Sardeshmukhi. 
The Chauth was divided into
 i. 25 percent for the ruler
 ii. 66 percent for Maratha officials and 

military heads for the maintenance 
of troops.
 iii. 6 percent for the Pant Sachiv (Chief, 
a Brahman by birth)
 iv. 3 percent for the tax collectors.
Customs, excise duties and sale of forest 

produce also yielded much income.  

Goldsmiths were allowed to mint coins on 
payment of royalty to the government and 
getting license for the purpose. They had 
to maintain a certain standard.  When it 
was found that the standard was not being 

met all private mints were closed in 1760 
and a central mint was established.  
Miscellaneous taxes were also 
collected.  It included 1. Tax on land, held 

by Deshmukhs and Deshpandes. 2. Tax on 
land kept for the village Mahars. 3. Tax 
Deshpandes
 were district officers who 
were in charge of accounts and were to 

observe the activities of Mamlatdars and 
Kamavistars.  It was a system of checks 
and balances.
In order to prevent misappropriation 
of public money, the Maratha government 

collected a heavy sum (Rasad) from the 

Mamlatdars and other officials.  It was 
collected on their first appointment to 
a district.  In Baji Rao II™s time, these 
offices were auctioned off.  The clerks and 
menials were paid for 10 or 11 months in 

a year.  
Village AdministrationThe village was the basic unit of 

administration and was self-supportive.  
The 
Patel
 was the chief village officer and 
was responsible for remitting revenue 

collections to the centre.  He was not 
paid by the government.  His post was 

hereditary. The Patel was helped by the 
Kulkarni
 or accountant and record-
keeper. There were hereditary village 
servants who had to perform the 
communal functions.  The carpenters, 
blacksmiths and other village artisans 
gave 
begar
 or compulsory labour.
Urban AdministrationIn towns and cities the chief officer was 
the 
Kotwal
.  The maintenance of peace and 
order, regulation of prices, settling civil 

disputes and sending of monthly accounts 
to the governments were his main duties.  
He was the head of the city police and also 

functioned as the magistrate.
Sources of RevenueLand revenue was the main source 

of income.  The Peshwas gave up the 
system of sharing the produce of the 
agricultural land followed under Shivaji™s 

74high priority.  If it failed, then the case was 
transferred for decision to a panchayat 
appointed by the Patel in the village and 
by the leading merchants in towns.  The 
panchayat was a powerful institution.  Re-
trial also took place.  Appeals were made 

to the Mamlatdar.
In criminal cases there was a 
hierarchy of the judicial officers.  At the 

top was the Raja Chhatrapati and below 
him were the Peshwa, Sar-Subahdar, the 
Mamlatdar and the Patel.  Flogging and 
torture were inflicted to extort confession.   
ArmyThe Maratha military system under 
the Peshwas was modelled on the 
Mughal military system.  The mode 
of recruitment, payment of salaries, 
provisions for the families of the soldiers, 
and the importance given to the cavalry 

showed a strong resemblance to the 
Mughal military system.  
The Peshwas gave up the notable 
features of the military system followed 

under Shivaji. Shivaji had recruited 
soldiers locally from Maratha region.  But 
the Peshwas drafted soldiers from all parts 
of India and from all social groups. The 

army had Arabs, Abyssinians, Rajputs, 
Rohillas and Sikhs. The Peshwa™s army 
comprised mercenaries of the feudal 
chieftains. As the fiefs of the rival chiefs 
were in the same area, there were lots of 

internal disputes.  It affected the solidarity 
of the people of the Maratha state.
CavalryThe cavalry was naturally the main 
strength of the Maratha army.  Every 
jagirdar had to bring a stipulated number 
of horsemen for a general muster, every 
year.  The horsemen were divided into 
three classes based on the quality of the 

horses they kept.
on the lands irrigated by wells. 4. House 

tax from all except Brahmins and village 
officials. 5. Annual fee for the testing of 
weights and measures. 6. Tax on the re-
marriage of widows. 7. Tax on sheep and 
buffaloes. 8. Pasture fee. 9. Tax on melon 

cultivation in river beds. 10. Succession 
duty. 11. Duty on the sale of horses, etc. 
When the Maratha government was in 

financial difficulty, it levied on all land-
holders, Kurja-Patti or Tasti-Patti, a tax 
equal to one year™s income of the tax-
payer.
The administration of justice also 
earned some income.  A fee of 25% was 

charged on money bonds.  Fines were 
collected from persons suspected or 
found guilty of adultery. Brahmins were 
exempted from duty on things imported 

for their own use. 
Police SystemWatchmen, generally the Mahars, were 

employed in every village. But whenever 
crime was on the rise, government sent 
forces from the irregular infantry to control 
crimes.  ˜e residents of the disturbed area 
had to pay an additional house tax to meet 

the expenditure arising out of maintaining 
these armed forces.  
Baji Rao II appointed additional 
police officers to detect and seize offenders.  

In the urban areas, magisterial and police 
powers were given to the Kotwal.  Their 
additional duties were to monitor the 
prices, take a census of the inhabitants, 

conduct trials on civil cases, supply labour 
to the government and levy fees from the 
professional duties given to the Nagarka 
or police superintendent.
Judicial SystemThe Judicial System was very imperfect.   
There was no codified law.  There were no 
rules of procedure.  Arbitration was given 

75into three large Nayankaras: Senji, ˜anjavur 
and Madurai. Under the new system the 
subordinate chie˙ains were designated as 
Palayakkarars and their ˛efdom as Palayams.  
˜anjavur which remained as a part of 
the Chola territories ˛rst and then of the 

Pandya kingdom became a vassal state of the 
Madurai Sultanate, from which it passed into 
the hands of Nayaks. ˜e rivalry between 

the Nayaks of Madurai and ˜anjavur ˛nally 
led to the eclipse of Nayak rule of ˜anjavur 
in 1673. Troops from Bijapur, led by the 
Maratha general Venkoji, defeated the Nayak 
of Madurai and captured ˜anjavur. Venkoji 

crowned himself king, and Maratha rule 
began in ˜anjavur in 1676. 
When Shivaji invaded the Carnatic 
in 1677, he removed Venkoji and placed 
his half-brother Santaji on the throne. But 
Venkoji recaptured Thanjavur and, after 
his death, his son Shahji became the ruler 

of Thanjavur kingdom. Shaji had no heir 
to succeed. So his brother Serfoji I became 
the next ruler and remained in power for 

sixteen years (1712-1728). After him one 
of his brothers Tukkoji succeeded him 
(1728), followed by Pratap Singh (1739-
1763), whose son Thuljaji ruled up to 
1787. Serfoji II aged 10, was then crowned, 
Infantry and ArtilleryThe Marathas preferred to serve in 

the cavalry. So men for infantry were 
recruited from other parts of the country. 
The Arabs, Rohillas, Sikhs and Sindhis in 
the Maratha infantry were paid a higher 
salary compared to the Maratha soldiers.   

The Maratha artillery was manned mostly 
by the Portuguese and Indian Christians. 
Later on, the English were also recruited.
Navy˜e Maratha navy was built for the purpose 

of guarding the Maratha ports, thereby 
checking piracy, and collecting customs 
duties from the incoming and outgoing 
ships. Balaji Vishwanath built naval bases 
at Konkan, Khanderi and Vijayadurg.   

Dockyard facilities were also developed. 
15.8  
Maratha Rule in TamilnaduCircumstances leading to its establishment Krishna Devaraya, during his reign (1509-
1529), developed the Nayankara system. 
Accordingly, the Tamil country was divided 
Raja Desinghu:
 The Maratha king Rajaram, 
threatened by Mughal forces, had to flee from Raigarh 
and take asylum in Senji. Pursuing him, the Mughal 

forces led by General Zulfikar Khan, and then by 

Daud Khan, succeeded in taking over Senji. During 

the Mughal expedition against Senji, a Bundela Rajput 

chieftain, Swarup Singh was employed as Kiladar (fort 

commandant) of Senji in 1700. In due course Swarup 

Singh gained control over the entire Senji. After his 

death in 1714, his son Tej Singh (Desinghu) assumed the governorship of Senji. Desinghu 

refused to pay tribute to the Mughal emperor and invited the wrath of Nawab Sadat-ul-lah 

Khan. In  the ensuing battle Raja Desinghu, who was only twenty two years old then, was 

killed. His young wife committed sati. The gallantry displayed by the daring Rajput youth 
against the Nawab is immortalized in many popular ballads in Tamil.
Senji Fort

76˜e Saraswati Mahal library, built by 
the Nayak rulers and  enriched by Serfoji 
II contains a record of the day-to-day 

proceedings of the Maratha court - as 

Modi documents, French-Maratha 

correspondence of the 18
th century. Modi 
was the script used to write the Marathi 

language. It is a treasure house of rare 

manuscripts and books in many languages
Saraswati  Mahal library
Serfoji II found in his 
contemporary missionary scholar C.S. 
John in Tranquebar, an innovator in 
education.  John carried out reforms and 
experiments in schooling ranging from 
residential arrangements for students and 
innovations in curriculum and pedagogy. 

But his most important proposal was a 
project submitted to the English colonial 
government in 1812, urging it to sponsor 

free schools for Indian children, for 
instruction in Tamil and English. This was 
at a time when English education was not 
available to non-Christian Indians. 
˜omas Munro, governor of Madras, 
proposed a scheme for elementary public 

schools in the 1820s, but the Company 
government did not establish a modern school 
for natives in Madras till 1841.  In contrast, 
from the start, the German missionaries had 

run several free vernacular and English schools 
in the southern provinces since 1707. Serfoji II 
was in advance of both the missionary and the 

colonial state, for as early as 1803 in ˜anjavur 
with Thuljoji‚s brother Amarsingh acting 

as Regent. Disputing this succession, the 
English thrust an agreement on Serfoji II, 
according to which the latter was forced 

to cede the administration of the kingdom 
to the British. Serfoji II was the last ruler 
of the Bhonsle dynasty of the Maratha 

principality of Thanjavur. 
Serfoji IISerfoji II was a 

remarkable ruler. He was 
educated by the German 
Christian missionary 
Friedrich Schwartz, 
Serfoji. Similarly Serfoji 
II turned out to be a well-known practitioner 
of Western science and medicine. Yet he was 

a devoted keeper of Indian traditions. He 

mastered several European languages and 
had an impressive library of books in every 
branch of learning. Serfoji™s modernising 
projects included the establishment of a 
printing press (the ˚rst press for Marathi and 

Sanskrit) and enrichment of the Saraswati 
Mahal Library. His most innovative project, 
however, was the establishment of free 
modern public schools run by his court, for 
instruction in English and the vernacular 

languages.
 Serfoji II
XI History 2nd Term_English version CHAPTER 15.indd   7624-09-2018   13:10:28
77important herbs in the form of exquisite 
hand paintings.
Serfoji™s strategic initiatives in 
modern education enabled the ˜anjavur 
court elite and subjects to enter and bene˛t 
from the emerging colonial social and 

economic order. ˜e court o˝cials, mostly 
Brahmins, trained in European knowledge, 
technologies and arts became leading agents 

of colonial modernity, equal to the English-
educated 
dubashe
s, writers and interpreters, 
both Hindu and Christian, who mediated 

between the Europeans and Indian courts. 
Two of Serfoji™s pandits (one of them was 

Kottaiyur Sivakolundu Desigar) joined the 
Company™s College of Fort St.George and 
became leaders in translation and print 
culture. ˜e careers and projects of Serfoji 
and John illuminate the important roles that 

enterprising individuals, and small places, 
such as a Danish-Tamil ˛shing village and 
a Maratha-Tamil principality, played in the 

history of change in colonial Tamilnadu. 
Serfoji II was a patron of 
traditional Indian arts like dance and 
music.  He authored 
Kumarasambhava 
Champu
, Devendra Kuravanji
, and 
Mudra 
rakshaschaya
.  He introduced western 
musical instruments like clarinet, and 
violin in Carnatic music.  He is also 
credited with popularising the unique 
Thanjavur style of painting.  Serfoji was 

interested in painting, gardening, coin-
collecting, martial arts and patronized 
chariot-racing, hunting and bull-fighting.  

He created the first zoological garden 
in Tamilnadu in the Thanjavur palace 
premises.
Serfoji II died on 7
th March 1832 
after almost forty years of his rule.  His 
death was mourned throughout the 
kingdom and his funeral procession was 
attended by more than 90, 000 people. At 
his funeral, Rev. Bishop Heber observed: 

‚I have seen many crowned heads, but no 
one whose deportment was more princely™.
he had established the ˛rst modern public 

school for non-Christian natives. While Indian 
rulers o˙en endowed educational institutions 
of higher learning, they did not establish 
elementary schools, nor did they administer 

any schools or colleges. Serfoji™s most striking 
initiative was the founding and management 
of free elementary and secondary schools 

for orphans and the poor in ˜anjavur city 
and other adjacent places.  Included were 
schools for all levels, charity schools, colleges 
and 
padashalas 
for Sanskrit higher learning. 
˜e schools catered to the court elites, Vedic 
scholars, orphans and the poor. 
A second innovation was the 
introduction of 
navavidya 
(‚modern™ or ‚new™ 
learning) in the state-run schools. 
According to an 1823 report produced 
for Governor Munro™s census of education, 
21 of the 44 free schools in the wider 

˜anjavur district were run by Serfoji™s  

government, 19 by the missionaries, one 

by a temple. ˜ere were three schools that 

were run by teachers themselves free of 

cost. In the state-run free schools Serfoji 

made modern education available to all. 
In 1822, at the free school in 
Muktambal Chattiram
 the king™s favourite 
almshouse established in 1803, 15 teachers 
taught a total of 464 students of diverse castes, 
in two classes, in the morning and in the 

evening. Serfoji also supported a free school 

for needy Christians, run by missionaries in 
the village of Kannandangudi.  
Serfoji II established 
Dhanvantari 
Mahal
, a research institution that 
produced herbal medicine for humans 

and animals.  Maintaining case-sheets of 
patients was introduced.
 Physicians of 
modern medicine, Ayurveda, Unani and 
Siddha schools undertook research on 
drugs and herbs for medical cure.  They 
produced eighteen volumes of research 
material.  Serfoji also catalogued the 

78SUMMARYShivaji™s rise, his military conquests and his encounter with Aurangzeb are dealt 
with
Shivaji™s administrative reforms are explained
Shivaji™s successors and their achievements under the Peshwas Balaji Viswanath, 

Baji Rao and Balaji Baji Rao are discussed
Third Battle of Panipat and its consequences for the Marathas and the Mughals are 

analyzed
The resistance of Marathas against the British policy of Subsidiary System and the 

resultant outbreak of the three Anglo-Maratha Wars are highlighted
Maratha ruler Serfoji II™s remarkable contribution to the progress and development 

of Thanjavur region is focused
EXERCISE I. Choose the correct answer
 1. Guerilla warfare was the strength of ____________ army.
 a) Maratha
 b) Mughal
 c) British
 d) Nayaks
 2. ____________ was the Guru of Shivaji.
 a) Dadaji Kondadev
 b) Ramdas
 c) Tukaram
 d) Shaji Bhonsale
 3. Treaty of Purandar was signed between Shivaji and ____________.
 a) Afzalkhan
 b) Shayistakhan
 c) Jai Singh
 d) Aurangazeb
 4. The Council of Ministers of Shivaji was known as ____________.
 a) Ashta Pradhan
 b) Astadiggajas
 c) Navarathnas
 d) Panchapandavas
 5. Chaudh was ____________ of the revenue collected from the district conquered by the 
Marathas.
 a) 1/3  b) 1/4 c) 1/6 d) 1/10 6. In the Military organization of Shivaji, the smallest unit was headed by a ____________.
 a) Naik
 b) Havildars
 c) Bargirs
 d) Shiledars
 7. ____________ was the Peshwa who enhanced the power of the Maratha Empire.
 a) Baji Rao I
 b) Balaji Viswanath
 c) Balaji Baji Rao
 d) Baji Rao II
 8. The Kohinoor diamond was taken away by ____________.
 a) Ahmad Shah Abdali
 b) Nadir Shah
 c) Shuja-ud-Daulah
 d) Najib-ud-Daulah
 9. ____________ treaty brought the first Anglo-Maratha War to an end.
 a) Treaty of Madras
 b) Treaty of Pune
 c) Treaty of Salbai
 d) Treaty of Bassein

79 10. ____________ was the British Governor-General on the eve of the Second Anglo-Maratha 
War.
 a) Lord Cornwallis
 b) Lord Wellesley
 c) Lord Hastings
 d) Lord Dalhousie
 11. At the village level ____________ was responsible for the remission of the revenue 

collections to the centre.
 a) Deshmukhs
 b) Kulkarni
 c) Kotwal
 d) Patel
 12. ____________ built naval bases at Konkan, Khanderi and Vijayadurg.
 a) Balaji Baji Rao
 b) Nana Sahib
 c) Baji Rao II
 d) Balaji Vishwanath
 13. ____________ developed the Nayankara System.
 a) Serfoji II
 b) Raja Desinghu
 c) Krishnadeva Raya
 d) Pratap Singh
 14. Serfoji II established ____________ that produced herbal medicine for humans and 

animals.
 a) Saraswathi Mahal
 b) Muktambal Chattram
 c) Navavidya
 d) Dhanvantari Mahal
 15. Name the book which was not written by Serfoji II.
 a) Kumarasambhava Champu
 b) Devendra Kuravanji
 c) Mudrarakshaschaya
 d) Kumarasambhavam
 II. Find out the correct statement
 A (i) Afzalkhan was appointed the Governor of the Deccan in 1660 with the main purpose   of 

crushing Shivaji.
 (ii) Senji acted as the first line of defence for Shivaji™s successors.
 (iii) The revenue administration of Shivaji was humane and beneficent to the cultivators.
 (iv) Sardeshmukhi was an additional 15% of the revenue which Shivaji collected.
 B (i) The English made friendly relations with the Marathas and got the right to free trade in 

Deccan region.
 (ii) Sahu defeated and killed Dost Ali the Nawab of Arcot in 1749.
 (iii) The Judicial System under Peshwas was perfect.
 (iv) Venkoji was the last ruler of Bhonsle dynasty of Maratha principality of Thanjavur.
 III. From the following, find out the 
correct
 answer
A (i) The administration of Justice under Shivaji was of a primitive nature.
 (ii) There were regular courts and procedure.
 a)  (i) is correct
 b)  (ii) is correct
 c)  (i) and (ii) are correct
 d)  (i) and (ii) are wrong

80B (i) The tottering Mughal Empire neglected the defence of North East frontier area.
 (ii) This prompted Nadir Shah to invade India.
 a)  (i) is correct
 b)  (ii) is correct
 c)  (i) and (ii) are correct
 d)  (i) and (ii) are wrong
C  
Assertion (A):
 The Third Battle of Panipat paved the way for the rise of British power in 
India.
  Reason (R):
 The defeat in this Battle dealt a severe blow to the Marathas and the Mughals.
 a) A is correct; R is the correct explanation of A.
 b) A is correct; R is wrong.
 c) Both A and R are wrong.
 d) A is correct; but R is not the correct explanation of A.
D.  
Assertion (A): 
Men for infantry were recruited from Maharashtra itself.
  Reason (R):
 The Marathas preferred to serve in the cavalry.
 a) A is wrong; R is correct.
 b) A is correct; R explains about A.
 c) A and R are wrong
 d) A and R are correct
 IV.
 A) Which of the following pair is 
wrongly
 matched
 1. Shivaji
 -  Mountain-rat
 2. Baji Rao I
 - Battle of Udgir
 3. Timur Shah
 - Viceroy of Lahore
 4. Desinghu
 -  Senji
  
(B) Match the following
 a. Amatya
 - 1) Records of Kings
 b. Summant
 - 2) Public morals
 c. Pandit Rao
 - 3) War and peace
 d. Walkia Nawis
 - 4) Public accounts
 (a) 4, 1, 2, 3 b) 1, 2, 4, 3 c) 4, 3, 2, 1 d) 1, 4, 2, 3  
(C) Arrange the successors of Shivaji chronologically.
  
1. Sambhaji, Shahu, Rajaram, Sambhaji II
  
2. Sambhaji, Rajaram, Shahu, Sambhaji II
  
3. Rajaram, Sambhaji, Shahu, Sambhaji II
  
4. Sambhaji, Sambhaji II, Rajaram, Shahu
 V. Write
 you answers
 brief
ly 1. Write a note on the conflict between Shivaji and Afzal Khan.
 2. What were the terms of the treaty of Purandhar?
 3. Write about Tara Bai.

81 4. Write a note on a) Chauth b) Sardeshmukhi
 5. Point out the Provicion of the Treaty of Basslin
 6. What marked the climax of the Maratha military might?
 7. Mention the terms of the treaty signed in 1817 between the British and the Peshwa.
 8. Write a note on Saraswati Mahal Library.
 9. In what aspect was Serfoji II in advance of both the missionaries and the colonial state?
 10. What do you know about Kanhoji Angira?
 VI. Write
 a short
 note on the following
 1. Narrate the causes for the rise of the Marathas.
 2. Describe the military organization under Shivaji.
 3. Point out the results of the Third Battle of Panipat.
 4. Give an account of the war fought during 1775-1782.
 5. What were the outcomes of the Third Anglo-Maratha War?
 6. What was the Nayankara System?
 7. Explain the gallantry displayed by Raja Desinghu.
 8. ﬁThe introduction of Navavidya was innovativeﬂ Œ How?
 VII. Answer in detail
 1. Highlight the military conquests of Shivaji.
 2. Compare and contrast the Shivaji land revenue adminstration and Peshwa land 
revenue adminstration
 3. Discuss the career and achievement of Baj Rao I.
 4. Highlight the sources of revenue under the Peshwas.
 5. Describe Serfoji II™s contribution to modern education.
 VIII. Activities
 1. On the outline map of India, mark the Maratha Empire under Shivaji.
 2. Attempt a biographical sketch on Shivaji.
 IX. Assignment
 1. Prepare a timeline chart for Maratha rulers.
 2. List out the taxes that we pay to the government.
 3. Visit Saraswathi Mahal Library and have a comparison with your nearby library.

82GLOSSARYimpregnableindestructibleravageplunderbelligerent policypolicy of intense war force
relentlessunyielding
ecclesiastical headhead of the Roman Catholic 
churchendorsementapproval
breachviolatesolidarityunity for causes
pedagogyteaching method  REFERENCES 1. V.D. Mahajan, 
India Since 1526,
 S. Chand & Company, New Delhi, 1991
 2. Burton Stein, 
A History of India
, OUP, 1998.
 3. Jadunath Sarkar, 
Shivaji and His Times
, Longmans, London, 1920. 
 4. Peterson, Indira Viswanathan, 
Serfoji II: Scholar King of Thanjavur
, Oxford University Press, 
2010INTERNET RESOURCES 1. M.G. Ranade, 
Rise of the Maratha Power
, archive.org/details/in.ernetˆ
 2. Britanica.com -online encyclopaediaˆ
TIME LINE (AD/CE)Birth of Shivaji
1627Attack of Shivaji on Surat
1664Treaty of Purandar
1665Coronation of Shivaji
1674Death of Shivaji
1680Battle of Panipat III
1761First Anglo-Maratha War
1775-1782Second Anglo-Maratha War
1803-1806Third Anglo-Maratha War
1817-1819 Death of Serfoji II
1832
83Introduction The beginning of British rule in India is 
conventionally ascribed to 1757, after the 
Battle of Plassey was won by the English 
East India Company against the Nawab 
of Bengal. But the Europeans had arrived 
in India by the beginning of the sixteenth 

century. Their original intention was to 
procure pepper, cinnamon, cloves and 
other spices for the European markets 

and participate in the trade of the Indian 
Ocean. 
The Portuguese were the first 
Europeans to establish themselves in 
India. Vasco da Gama discovered the 

direct sea route to India from Europe 
around the Cape of Good Hope at the end 
of the fifteenth century. Subsequently, 
the Portuguese conquered Goa on the 

west coast in 1510. Goa then became the 
political headquarters for the Portuguese 
in India and further east in Malacca 
and Java. The Portuguese perfected a 
pattern of controlling the Indian Ocean 

trade through a combination of political 
aggressiveness and naval superiority. 
Their forts at Daman and Diu enabled 

them to control the shipping in the 
Arabian Sea, using their well-armed ships. 
The Coming of the Europeans16Lesson
Learning ObjectivesTo acquaint yourself with 
IEuropean interactions with Indian states and society during 1600-1750
Commercial networks and institutions in India in the early modern period
The Indian ports and their importance in Indian Ocean trade
The impact of the entry of the European trading companies on Indian merchants, 
trade and commerce
IIPortuguese trade interests in India
The impact of the Portuguese and Dutch presence in India 
Rivalry and wars between the French and the Dutch
The colonial settlements of Denmark and their importance
Clashes over trading monopoly between the French and the British in the 

Carnatic region
The emergence of England as an undisputed power after the Carnatic Wars

84The other European nations who came to 
India nearly a century later, especially the 
Dutch and the English, modelled their 
activities on the Portuguese blueprint. 
Thus we need to understand the advent of 
the European trading companies as an on-

going process of engagement with Indian 
political authorities, local merchants and 
society, which culminated in the conquest 

of Bengal by the British in 1757. 
 This lesson has two parts. The 
political history of India and the changing 

scenario that emerged after 1600 are 
discussed in the first part. The second part 
deals with the arrival of European trading 
companies in India and the impact each 
one made on Indian society. 
I16.1 Political Affairs1600-1650: The Mughal EmpireThis was the period when the Mughal 

empire was at the peak of its power. The 
Europeans were quite aware of the wealth 
and power of the Mughals, and English 
poets even wrote about the fabulous 
ﬁwealth of Indiaﬂ. Travellers from all parts 

of Europe visited India regularly during 
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 
The journals of their travels present a 

detailed contemporary account of the 
empire and society in India.
 By 1600 Akbar had achieved 
his imperial dream and extended the 
frontiers of the Mughal empire through 
his conquests in Rajasthan and Gujarat. 
Gujarat was conquered in 1573, and this 
gave the Mughal empire valuable access to 
the port of Surat, which was the gateway 

to west Asia and Europe. Besides trade, 
the ships carrying pilgrims to Mecca left 
from Surat. The importance of Surat to 

the Mughals can be appreciated from the 
fact that Surat had two governors, one the 
governor of the city, and the other, the 
governor of the castle which had been 

built on the river Tapti to protect the city. 
The governor of the city was in charge of 
civilian affairs and collecting the revenues 
from customs duties.
British factory at Surat
Akbar had also tried to extend 
his empire in the east beyond Bihar 

by conquering Bengal. But Bengal was 
not really integrated into the empire 
until nearly three decades later, when 
it became one of the provinces (
subah
) under Jahangir. Under Akbar, the revenue 
system of the empire had been revamped 
by Todar Mal so that a unified system of 

governance and revenue collection could 
function throughout the empire. At his 
death, therefore, Akbar left a powerful, 
economically prosperous and well-
administered empire.
The Dutch, followed by the English, 
arrived in Surat in the early years of the 

1600s to begin their trading activities. 
The Mughal governor permitted them to 
trade, and to set up their ﬁfactoriesﬂ (as the 

business premises of the European traders 
which also functioned as warehouses were 
termed), but they were not allowed to have 

any territorial authority over any part of 
the city. This frustrated their ambitions to 
follow the Portuguese model. 
The English acquired the islands 
of Bombay in 1668, and set up their 

headquarters in Bombay in 1687. Their 
primary objective was to develop Bombay 
as an alternate base for their operations. 

85unsettled political conditions. Madurai 
and Thanjavur fought several times to 
establish their superiority. There were 
also rebellions against the Vijayanagar 
emperor. Besides these on-going conflicts, 
Golkonda invaded the Coromandel in 

1646 and annexed the area between Pulicat 
and San Thome, which also changed the 
political scenario in the region.
The Dutch and the English were 
able to acquire territorial rights on the east 

coast during these years. They realized that 
they needed a base on the Coromandel 
coast to access the piece goods needed 

for trading with the spice-producing 
islands of Indonesia. The Dutch had 
successfully negotiated to acquire Pulicat 
(Palaverkadu) from the Nayak of Senji 
and constructed a fort there. The English 

got a piece of land further south from the 
local chief, Damarla Venkatadri Nayak on 
which they built Fort St. George in 1639. 

Thus an English settlement came up which 
eventually grew into Chennai (Madras), 
the capital of the Madras Presidency.  
1650-1700: The Mughal EmpireEmperor Aurangzeb began an ambitious 

programme of extending his empire 
south to the Deccan, and the kingdoms of 
Ahmednagar, Bijapur and Golkonda were 
conquered in the 1680s. This extended the 
Mughal control of the Deccan as far south 

as Chennai. But the overextended Mughal 
empire soon began to reveal its inherent 
weakness. This became most apparent 

when the Marathas, under Shivaji, began 
to grow in power and military strength. 
They attacked Surat with impunity in 
1664, though it was soon abandoned. But 
their second raid in 1670 devastated Surat 

and its trade took several years to recover. 
This seriously challenged the claim of 
Mughal invincibility and it sounded the 
beginning of the gradual disintegration of 
the Mughal empire.
But Surat under the protection of the 
Mughal state still remained the preferred 
centre of commercial activity for the 
merchants.
1600-1650: South India after VijayanagarSouth India, especially the Tamil 
region, presented a sharp contrast to the 
centralized stability of the Mughal empire 
in these decades. Politically the region 
was fragmented and unsettled. Under 
Vijayanagar rule, three Nayak kingdoms 

had been set up in the Tamil region: 
in Madurai, Thanjavur and Senji. The 
objective was to provide financial and 
manpower resources to the empire. After 

the defeat of Vijayanagar in 1565 in the 
Battle of Talikota by the combined forces 

of the rulers of Ahmednagar, Bijapur 
and Golkonda, the central authority of 
the once dominant kingdom became 
very weak. The Nayak kingdoms became 
virtually autonomous, though they made 

a ritualistic acknowledgment of the 
authority of the Vijayanagar emperor. In 
addition to the larger Nayak kingdoms, 

several local chiefs also controlled some 
parts of the region. The most notable 
of them was probably the Setupati of 
Ramanathapuram, who was also keen to 
assert his independence. Between 1590 

and 1649 the region witnessed several 

military conflicts arising out of these 
Fort St. George

86had decided to shift their focus to the 
spice-producing islands of Indonesia 
and established their capital at Jakarta 
(Batavia). Chennai, in the meantime, 
had grown into a prosperous town. The 
English, after many years of struggle, 

became a power to reckon with in the 
region. Surat continued to suffer due to 
the uncertain political conditions, and 

by 1750, the local merchants had begun 
to declare themselves to be ﬁunder the 
protectionﬂ of the Dutch or the English 
in order to feel more secure. Bombay 
therefore became a viable alternative as 

a trade centre, attracting merchants from 
Surat and other parts of Gujarat.
Nagapattinam in 1702
16.2 The EconomyAgriculture India was primarily an agricultural economy. 
Most of the population lived in the rural 
areas and they depended on agriculture 
for their livelihood. In addition to food 
grains, they grew several commercial crops. 
˜ese included sugarcane, oil seeds, cotton 

and indigo. ˜ere was a brisk trade in 
food grains, ghee, jaggery and other food 
products from the surplus areas to the de˚cit 

areas within India. Food grains, particularly, 
were transported on coastal boats and the 
Tamil region, for instance, imported food 
grains from the Andhra region and Bengal. 
In the 1660s, after the attack on 
Surat, Shivaji turned his attention to 
south India, and defeated the Nayaks of 
Senji and Thanjavur. Though Senji was 
conquered by the Mughals a few years 

later, Thanjavur survived as a Maratha-
ruled state. The Maratha kings, with their 
inclusive policy of assimilating Tamil 
intellectual and cultural traditions, made 
Thanjavur the cultural capital of the Tamil 

region. 
1700-1750: The Mughal Empire and the Successor StatesAurangzeb, the last of the ﬁgreat 
Mughalsﬂ, died in 1707. One of the major 
developments following his death was 
the establishment of what have been 

called ‚successor states™. Mughal viceroys 
in various parts of the country Oudh, 
Bengal, Hyderabad and the Carnatic set 

themselves up as independent rulers. The 
English and the Dutch had understood 
this vulnerability of the Mughal state.  
In Bengal and the Carnatic, the 
Nawabs had borrowed heavily from the 
English, and assigned vast tracts of land to 
them so that the English could collect the 

land revenue as repayment for the loans. 
This marks the beginning of British rule 
as revenue collectors. 
˜e name Carnatic originally refered 
to the region occupied by the Kannada- 
speaking people. In the eighteenth century 

it included the region lying between the 

Eastern Ghats and the Western Ghats, in 

the modern Indian states of Tamil Nadu, 

Karnataka, and southern Andhra Pradesh. 

˜e Nawab of Arcot controlled this region.
By this time the Dutch had given 
up Pulicat and moved their headquarters 
further south to Nagapattinam. They 

87within the country, and with external 
markets outside the country. The extensive 
trade network in the country operated in 
several circuits, from the village markets, 
to regional markets and large urban 
commercial centres, culminating in the 

ports which were the gateways to the 
markets outside the country.
Merchant Groups Just as the various kinds of markets 
functioned at different scales, merchants 
were also not a homogeneous group. 
There were traders and retailers who 
serviced markets in smaller centres. If 
mercantile activity can be deemed to be 

a pyramid, this class of merchants would 
be at the base of the pyramid. At its top 
were the great merchants, who were the 

prime movers in overseas trade with great 
reserves of capital, who controlled the 
producers in the hinterland of the ports. 
They generally employed the services of 
a network of brokers and sub-brokers to 

acquire goods from the interior regions or 
hinterland of the port towns. These agents 
could be said to form the middle tier of 
the merchant pyramid.
Banking and Rise of Merchant CapitalistsCommercial institutions were also well-
developed to promote such extensive 
trade. Because a variety of coins were in 
circulation, there were money-changers 
or 
shroffs
 to test coins for their purity 
and decide their value in current terms. 
They also served as local bankers. 
Instead of transferring money as cash 
from one place to another, merchants 

issued bills of exchange, known as 
hundis
 which would be cashed by shroffs at 

different destinations at a specified rate 
of discount. 
On the west coast, food grains from Gujarat 

were exported to the Malabar region in 
return for pepper, cinnamon and ginger. 

Food grains were also shipped to the Dutch 
establishments in Sri Lanka and Batavia. 
Cotton ManufacturesIndia also had a strong manufacturing base 
and was particularly famous for the variety 
of cotton fabrics produced at various 
centres across the country. Weaving was 
the second most important economic 
activity in the country, supported by 

subsidiary activities like spinning and 
dyeing. Manufacturing Œ that is, handicraft 
production Œ was carried on both in 

urban and rural areas. Luxury crafts, like 
metalwork were urban based. Weaving 
was mostly done in rural areas. India had 
a great advantage in that cotton was grown 
in the country. Indian craft communities 

also possessed specialized knowledge 
about dyeing cotton using chemicals like 
alum to produce a permanent colour. 
The Coromandel region was famous for 
its painted (
kalamkari
) fabrics which 
had designs drawn on the cloth and then 
dyed. By the sixteenth century these had 
become staple products for consumers in 

south-east Asia, especially the Indonesian 
islands. Cotton fabrics were the most 
important exports from all parts of India 
to the rest of the world. This continued 
well into the eighteenth century.
Marketing Production for an external market was 

widespread, so that there was a high degree 
of commercialization of production 
beyond subsistence levels. This required 
the organization of marketing by agencies 
which were distinct from the producers, 

that is, a class of merchants. Merchants 
thus linked producers who were dispersed 
in the rural areas with urban markets 

88ports which were served by a much larger 
hinterland producing a wider range of 
products. The ports of the Coromandel 
coast, like Masulipatnam, Pulicat and other 
ports further south served as intermediate 
ports for the ships from Burma and the 

Malay peninsula.
16.3 Advent of EuropeansThe arrival of the Europeans, beginning 

with the Portuguese, was the first major 
external shock to this well established 
and regulated system of trade. The 
primary interest of the Europeans was 
in securing spices for Europe directly. In 

the olden days, the spices were carried to 
the Persian Gulf ports and then overland 
to the Mediterranean. They soon learned 

that a simple bilateral exchange was 
not workable in the Asian markets. 
This was mainly because there was no 
demand in the local economies for the 
products of Europe, other than gold or 

silver. On the other hand, because of the 
universal demand in south-east Asian 
markets for Indian textiles, clothes from 
India served as a substitute medium of 
exchange. The demand for the painted 

fabrics of the Coromandel coast in the 
Indonesian islands, in particular, made 
the Dutch and the English set up their 

establishments on the east coast to 
procure the cloth that could be profitably 
exchanged for spices. 
16.4  
Collaboration with 
Indian MerchantsFrom the beginning of their trading 

venture in India, the Europeans realized 
that they could succeed only with the help 
and collaboration of the leading Indian 
merchants. The merchants, on their part, 
saw in the Europeans a great new business 

opportunity for expansion, and worked 
This well-developed infrastructure 
and organization of trade enabled the 

rich merchants to amass large fortunes.  
Such merchant princes or capitalists were 
found in all parts of India Œ the 
bani
as and 
Parsi merchants of Surat, the 
nagarseths 
of Ahmedabad, the Jagat Seths of Bengal, 

and the merchant communities of the 
Coromandel. Contemporary European 
observers noted that these merchants 

appropriated all the profits from trade 
to themselves, while the earnings and 
condition of the weavers and peasants 
were pitifully poor. This rendered them 
especially vulnerable to natural calamities 

like famines. In the Madras region, for 
instance, famine occurred at least ten 
times between 1678 and 1750. Sometimes 
there was widespread famine which lasted 
for several years on end. This drove the 

rural poor to sell themselves into slavery. 
Dutch records from the Coromandel 
regularly mention male and female slaves 

among the cargo sent to Batavia.
Overseas Trade The overseas trade from both the east 

and west coast was incorporated into 
Indian Ocean trade which had stabilized 
into a well-set pattern by the sixteenth 
century. Shipping in the Indian Ocean 
was segmented and carried on over 

several demarcated stages. Ships coming 
from China and the Far East sailed up 
to Malacca, where their cargoes were 

unloaded, and in return, goods from the 
west were taken back. From Malacca, 
ships sailed to the west coast of India, to 
Calicut or Cambay or Surat in Gujarat. 
Such intermediate ports were known 

as ﬁentrepotsﬂ. Goods from Europe and 
West Asia were exchanged in these ports 
for goods from the east, as well as locally 
produced pepper, spices, dyes, clothes 
and food grains. In the sixteenth century, 

Calicut gradually lost out to the Gujarat 

89Over these one hundred and fifty 
years, the English in India were gradually 
undergoing a metamorphosis from being 
traders to builders of a trading empire, 
eventually emerging as the virtual rulers 
of large parts of the country. 
II16.5  
Arrival of Europeans and the Aftermath Portuguese in IndiaDuring his ˚rst voyage Vasco da Gama came 

with 170 men in three vessels.  ˜e cordiality 
of Zamorin, the ruler of Calicut, made him 
comfortable. He journeyed back on 29 
August 1498 with only 
˚˛y ˚ve surviving men 

and of the three ships, 
two were laden with 
Indian goods.  Gama™s 

success made Portugal to 
send 1200 men with 13 vessels under Pedro 
Alvarez Cabral.  On 29 October 1502 Gama 
visited Calicut for the second time with a 
˝eet of 20 vessels.  Gama moved from Calicut 

to Cochin as its harbour was better.  He 
soon realized that the monopolistic trade of 
the Arabs needed to be broken if European 
trade was to thrive. He used the enmity 
between the two Hindu rulers of Cochin 

and Calicut for this 
purpose.  Before he 
returned to Portugal 

he established a 
factory [warehouse] 
in Cochin and a 
prison at Kannur.  
Consolidation of the Portuguese TradeThe Portuguese stopped yearly expeditions 
and instead decided to appoint a Viceroy.   
The first Viceroy was Francisco d™ Almeida 
with them. In Surat, the merchants were 

functioning with the security of the 
Mughal government to support them 
in case of any problems. But in Pulicat, 
and later in Chennai under the English 

and Pondicherry under the French, the 
merchants also saw in these early colonial 
enclaves a place of security from where 
they could carry on business safely, free 
from the continuing political turmoil in 

the Tamil region.
The Indian merchants were not at 
a disadvantage in their dealings with the 

Europeans till about 1700. In Surat, the 
situation changed because of the threat 
posed by the Maratha incursions and the 
inability of the Mughal state to provide 
security. In Chennai the English had 

stabilized and they could put pressure on 
merchants to accept unviable terms in 
order to increase their exports of cloth 
to Europe. Gradually, the power relations 
between the English and the local 

merchants began to change. The great 
merchant princes who were the dominant 
players on the trading scene in the previous 

century virtually disappeared. 
The expansion of demand from 
Europe for Indian textiles also had an 
impact on the indigenous economy. 
Initially, this increased demand was 

beneficial to the local economy. The 
productive resources (labour, raw 
materials and capital) could respond 
positively. However, as the demand from 
Europe continued to grow, the pressure 

to increase production exponentially 
began to strain the productive resources. 
The frequent famines in the south and 

the shortage of food grains and raw 
materials, for instance, were additional 
burdens which the weaver had to bear. 
Thus, though the increased trade 
opportunities were beneficial in the 

short run, the long term effects were not 
necessarily positive.
Zamorin

90during the period of De Noronha (1571) 
the Mughal ruler Akbar visited Cambay 
in Gujarat and the first contacts between 
the Portuguese and the Mughal emperor 
established.  
Akbar™s Contact with European Traders
In 1580 Philip II, King of Spain, defeated 
Portugal and annexed it. In India the Dutch 
defeated the Portuguese in Ceylon and 
later seized the Portuguese fort on Malabar 
Coast. ˜erea˚er rather than protecting 
their settlements in India, Portuguese began 

to evince  greater interest in Brazil.
The Impact of Portuguese PresenceFor the first time in the political history 
of India the Europeans conquered 
and seized territories from the Indian 
rulers.
Indian rulers remained divided and 

Europeans took advantage of it.  
The Europeans adopted new methods 

in the warfare.  Gun powder and 
superior artillery played a significant 
role. 
The Portuguese could contain the 

monopolistic trade of the Arabs. But 
it did not really help them.  Instead, 
it benefited the British who removed 
pirates on the sea routes and made the 
sea voyage safe.
who followed what is known as ‚Blue Water 

Policy,™ and accordingly, he added more 
ships to strengthen the navy rather than 
adding more settlements.  He destroyed 
the fleet of Zamorin and a fleet sent by the 
Sultan of Egypt.  He befriended the ruler 

of Cochin and built fortresses at Cochin, 
Kannur and other places on the Malabar 
coast. 
Albuquerque (1509-1515), the 
successor of Almeida, was the real 

founder of the Portuguese empire in 
India. He defeated Yusuf Adil Khan, the 
ruler of Bijapur in 1510 and captured 

Goa. He developed Goa into a centre of 
commerce by making all the ships sail on 
that route.  He encouraged people of all 
faiths to settle in Goa.  He was in favour of 
Europeans marrying Indian women and 

settling down in Portuguese controlled 
territories. His conquest of Malacca (in 
Malaysia) held by 

the Muslims, who 
commanded the trade 
route between India-
China and Mecca and 
Cairo, extended the 

empire.  He attacked 
the Arabs and was 
successful in taking 
Aden. In 1515 he took 
control of Ormuz.
Albuquerque attempted to stop 
the practice of Sati. 
Two more viceroys played a 
significant role in consolidating the 
Portuguese empire in India. They are Nino 
da Cunha and Antonio de Noronha.  Da 
Cunha occupied Bassein and Diu in 1534 
and 1537 respectively.  The port of Daman 
was wrested from the hands of Imad-ul 

Mulk in 1559.  Meanwhile in the middle 
of the sixteenth century, the Portuguese 
control over Ceylon increased with the 

completion of a fort in Colombo.  It was 
Albuquerque

91St.˙Francis Xavier, one of the founders 
of the Society of Jesus, arrived in Goa in 
1542 and travelled as far as Thoothukudi 
and Punnakayal to baptize the converts. 
Xavier established a network of Jesuit 
mission centres.  His visit is evident from 

the shrines dedicated to St. Xavier and the 
towering churches that came up in the 
fishing villages on the Coromandel Coast.
˜e Portuguese threatened disruption 
of trade by violence unless their protection, 

cartaz,
 was bought. Under the 
cartaz
 system, the Portuguese exacted money from 

the traders as price for protection against 

what they termed as piracy. But much of 
this was caused by Portuguese freebooters 
themselves and so the whole system was a 
blatant protection racket.   
The Dutch˜e ˚rst Dutch expedition to the South 
East Asia was in 1595 by a trader (Jan 
Huyghen van Linschoten), a merchant from 
Netherlands who lived in Lisbon.  ˜ere were 
several companies ˝oated by the traders and 
The marriages between Europeans 
and Indians, encouraged by the 
Portuguese in the territories occupied 
by them, created a new Eurasian 
racial group.  They were the ones who 
were later taken to other Portuguese 

colonies in Africa and Asia.  
The presence of Portuguese is very 

much evident in Chennai™s San Thome. 
Mylapore was the Portuguese ‚Black 
Town™. (Black Town of the British 
period was George Town)
Following the establishment of Portuguese 
settlements, Jesuit missionaries visited 
India. Notable among them are: 1. Fr. 
Roberto de Nobili, whose linguistic ability 
enabled him to write extensively in Tamil 
and Sanskrit. He is considered the father of 

Tamil prose. 2. Fr. Henriques introduced 
printing in Tamil and is called the father 
of printing press. 
Roberto de Nobile
San Thome Church
Clashes occurred between the 
Portuguese and the Muslim groups on the 
pearl fishery coast in the 1530s over the 
control of fishing and pearl diving rights 
and a delegation of Paravas complained 
to the Portuguese authorities at Cochin 

about the atrocities inflicted on them by 
Arab fleets and sought protection. Seizing 
the opportunity, the Portuguese sent their 

Roman Catholic priests (Padres) who 
converted thousands of fisher people 
to the Catholic religion. Following this 
The Amboyna Massacre Œ twenty 
servants of British East India Company, 
Portuguese and Japanese were tortured 

and killed by the agents of Dutch East 

India Company at Ambon Island in 

Indonesia in the year 1623.
Amboyna Massacre

92Pulicat served as the Coromandel 
headquarters of the Dutch East India 
Company.  Diamonds were exported from 
Pulicat to the western countries.  Nutmeg, 
cloves, and mace too were sent from here 
to Europe. A gun powder factory was 

also set up by the Dutch to augment their 
military power. 
One less known fact about the 
Dutch is they were involved in slave trade. 
People from Bengal and from settlements 
such as Tengapattinam and Karaikal were 
brought to Pulicat. The Dutch employed 

brokers at Madras for catching and 
shipping slaves. Famines, droughts and 
war that resulted in food shortage led to 

the flourishing of the slave trade. 
Wil O Dijk, a Ph.D. Scholar at Leiden 
University in one of her research papers 
noted that the passenger list of slaves 

transported in VOC ships within and 

from the Bay of Bengal from June 1621 to 

November 1665 showed a total of 26,885 

men, women and children Œ of which 1,379 

died. She further wrote that the export of 

Coromandel slaves surged during a famine 

caused by the Nayak rulers of ˜anjavur, 

Senji and Madurai, a˛er the fall of 

Vijayanagara empire.
A subsequent invasion of the 
Bijapur army led to the destruction of 
fertile agricultural lands of ˜anjavur 
pushing more people into slavery. ˜is time 
(1646) around 2118 slaves, mostly drawn 
from places situated along the coasts like 
Adirampattinam, Tondi and Kayalpattinam.  
The FrenchThe French attempted to establish a trade 

link with India as early as 1527. Taking a 
cue from the Portuguese and the Dutch, 
the French commenced their commercial 
operations through the French East India 
individuals to trade with the East.  ˜e state 

intervened and amalgamated them all and 
created a Dutch East India company in 1602 

[known as the United
 East
 Indies
 Company 
(in Dutch: Verenigde Oost-Indische 
Compagnie-abbreviated to VOC). ˜e 
newly created company established its 
hold over the Spice Islands (Indonesia).  In 
1641 the Dutch captured Malacca from the 

Portuguese and in 1658 the Dutch forced 
Portuguese to part with Ceylon.  ˜e Dutch 
were successful in Spice Islands but they 

suˆered reverses in India at the hands of the 
British. 
Dutch in Tamil Nadu˜e Portuguese who established a control 
over Pulicat since 1502 were overthrown 
by the Dutch. In Pulicat, located 60 
kilometers north of Chennai, the Dutch 
built the Castle Geldria.  ˜e remains of 
this 400 year old fort can be seen even 

now.  ˜is fort was once the seat of Dutch 
power. ˜e Dutch established control of 
Masulipatnam in 1605 and they established 

their settlement at Pulicat in 1610. ˜e 
other Dutch colonial forts and possessions 
include Nagapattinam, Punnakayal, Porto 
Novo, Cuddalore (Tiruppathiripuliyur) and 
Devanampatinam.  
Dutch Cemetery, Pulicat

93Pondicherry in 1673 was a small fishing 
village.  Francis Martin who became the 
Governor of Pondicherry later had spent 
four years in Madagascar before arriving 
Surat.  He made Pondicherry the strategic 
centre of French settlements in India.  
ﬁ˜e countryside through which we 
passed (outskirts of Pondichérry) was well-
cultivated and very beautiful. Rice was to 

be found in abundance... where there was 

water while cotton was grown....ﬂ Francis 

Martin about the landscape of Pondicherry 

in his diary. 
Rivalry and Wars with the DutchFrench attempts to capture Pondicherry 
were not easy. They had to deal with 
their main rivals, the Dutch. From 1672 
France and Holland were continuously 
at war. In India the French lacked men, 
money and arms, as they had diverted 

them to Chandranagore, another French 
settlement in Bengal. Therefore the 
Dutch could capture Pondicherry easily 

in 1693. It remained with the Dutch for 
six years. In 1697, according to the treaty 
of Ryswick, Pondicherry was once again 
restored to the French. However, it was 
handed over to the French only in 1699.  

Francis Martin remained as its governor 
till his death in 1706.  
The French secured Mahe in 
1725 and Karaikal in 1739.  The French 
were also successful in establishing and 

extending their settlements in Qasim 
Bazaar, Chandranagore and Balasore in 
the Bengal region. Pierre Benoit Dumas
 (1668Œ1745) was another able French 
governor in Pondicherry. However, the 

French had to face the threat of the 
English who proved too strong for them. 
Eventually they lost out on their hard 

earned fortunes to the English.  
Company, established in 1664. Unlike 
other European powers which appeared 
in India through the private trading 

companies, the French commercial   
enterprise was a project of King Louis 
XIV.  His minister of finance, Colbert, was 

instrumental in establishing the French 
East India Company.   
As the French effort was a 
government initiative, it did not attract 
the general public of France who viewed it 

as yet another way to tax people. 
Pondicherry through MadagascarThe French traders arrived in Madagascar 

(in Africa) in 1602. Though the French 
colonized Madagascar, they had to 
abandon it in 1674, excepting a small 
coastal trading post.  Berber, a French 
agent in India obtained a 
firman 
[a royal 
command or authorization] on September 
4, 1666 from Aurangzeb and the first 
French factory was established at Surat 

in December 1668, much against the 
opposition of the Dutch.  Within a year 
the French established another factory at 
Masulipatnam.  
Factory in the then context referred to 
a warehouse or a place where factors, or 
commercial agents, resided to transact 

business for their employers abroad. 
Realizing the need for a stronger 
foothold in India, Colbert sent a fleet to 
India, led by Haye (Jacob Blanquet de la 
Haye).  The French were able to remove 
the Dutch from San Thome in Mylapore in 
1672.   The French sought the support of 
Sher Khan Lodi, the local Governor, who 

represented the Sultan of Bijapur, against 
the Dutch.  The Dutch befriended the 
King of Golkonda who was a traditional 

foe of Bijapur.  It was Sher Khan Lodi 
who offered Pondicherry (Puducherry) 
as a suitable site for their settlement.   

94posts were established at Pipli (Hoogly 
River) and Balasore.  Investors in Denmark 
wanted to dissolve the Danish East India 
Company, but King Christian IV resisted 
it. Finally after his death in 1648 his son 
Frederick abolished it.  
A second Danish East India 
Company was started in 1696. Trade 

between Denmark and Tarangambadi 

resumed and many new trade outposts were 
also established. ˜e Nayak king of ˜anjavur 
gifted three more villages surrounding 
Tarangambadi. Two Danish Missionaries, 
the first protestant missionaries, arrived 

on 9 June 1706. The Danish settled in 
Andaman and Nicobar in 1755, but due 
to the threat of malaria they abandoned 
it in 1848. During the Napoleonic wars 
the British caused heavy damage to their 

possessions. Serampore was sold to the 
British in 1839 and Tranquebar and other 
settlements in 1845.
The Danes in Tamil NaduThe Danish Fort built in Tarangambadi 

is still intact. Bartholomaeus Ziegenbalg 
along with Heinrich Pluetshau arrived in 
Tranquebar in September 1706, as the first 
Lutheran missionaries in India. They began 
preaching, and baptized their first converts 

within ten months of their stay. Their 
work was opposed both by Hindus and 
by the local Danish authorities, and in 1707-08 
 Ziegenbalg had to spend four months in 
prison on a charge that by converting the 
natives he was encouraging rebellion. The 
Copenhagen Missionary Society wanted to 
encourage an indigenous 

Christian Church, and 
accordingly instructed 
its missionaries simply 
to preach the Gospel, and 
not to bother about other 

matters. Ziegenbalg, 
however, contended 
that a concern for the 
The influence of the French can 
still be seen in present day Pondicherry, 
Mahe, Karaikkal, and Chandranagore. 
The DanesDenmark and Norway (together till 
1813) possessed colonial settlements in 
India and Tamil Nadu. Tarangambadi or 
Tranquebar in Tamil Nadu, Serampore 
in West Bengal and Nicobar Islands were 
their possessions in India. On March 17, 

1616 the King of Denmark, Christian IV, 
issued a charter and created a Danish East 
India Company. This Company did not 

get any positive response from the Danish 
traders. Admiral Ove Gjedde led the 
first expedition to Ceylon in 1618.  The 
Danes could not get any trade contract 
in Ceylon. While they were returning in 

disappointment their main vessel was 
sunk by the Portuguese at Karaikkal.  
Thirteen stranded sailors with their trade 
director Robert Crappe were taken to the 
Nayak ruler of Thanjavur. Robert Crappe 

ably negotiated with the Thanjavur King 
and struck an agreement. According to 
the agreement signed on 20 November 

1620, the Danes received the village of 
Tarangambadi or Tranquebar and the 
right to construct a Fort there. 
Tarangambadi Fort 
The Danish fort at Tarangambadi 
was vulnerable to high tidal waves which 
frequently damaged roads and houses. 
Despite their involvement in the Thirty 
Years War and the financial loss they 
suffered, the Danish managed to set up 

a factory at Masulipatnam. Small trading 
Bartholomaeus 
 Ziegenbalg

95In 1645, the ruler of Golkonda overran the 
territories under the Company™s control in 
Madras. Aurangzeb conquered Golkonda 
in 1687 and brought the Company 
territories under Mughal rule. But the 
privileges granted to the English continued.  

Within a short time Madras replaced 
Masulipatinam as the headquarters of the 
English on the Coromandel Coast.  The 

island of Bombay, which Charles II had 
inherited as dowry, was transferred to the 
Company in 1668.The Charter of 1683 
empowered the Company to raise military 
forces and the right to declare war or make 

peace with the powers in America, Africa 
and Asia. In 1688 Madras had a municipal 
government with a Mayor. In 1693 the 
Company obtained another grant of three 
villages surrounding Madras and in 1702 

five more villages were granted.  
Chandragiri Fort
BengalIn Bengal it was a long drawn struggle for 

the British to obtain trading rights.  The 
Company obtained trading privileges from 
Shah Shuja, the second son of Shajahan 
and the Governor of Bengal, but there was 
no royal confirmation of such privileges.  

The trading rights for the British in Bengal 
were obtained only in 1680.  Local officials 
interfered with the trading rights of the 

British and this resulted in the Company 
declaring war with the ruler representing 
the Mughals.  Peace was restored in 
1690 and the Company established its 
first settlement at Sultanuti, a site which 
physical welfare of ﬁothersﬂ was implicit 
in the Gospel.
Ziegenbalg set up a printing 
press, and published studies of the 

Tamil language and of Indian religion 
and culture. His translation of the New 

Testament into Tamil in 1715 was first in 
any Indian language. The church building 
that he and his associates constructed in 
1718 is still in use today. He succeeded in 
establishing a seminary for the training 

of local clergy. When he died on 23 
February 1719, he left behind a full Tamil 
translation of the complete Bible and of 
Genesis to Ruth (Bible Story book series), 
many brief writings in Tamil, two church 

buildings, the seminary, and 250 baptized 
Christians. 
Advent of the BritishThe English East India CompanyA group of wealthy merchants of 
Leadenhall Street in London secured a 
royal charter from Queen Elizabeth I to 
have a share in the lucrative spice trade 
with the East. The Company, headed 
by a governor, was managed by a court 

of 24 Directors. In 1611, King James I 
obtained from Mughal Emperor Jahangir 
through William Hawkins, permission for 

regular trade. The English obtained some 
trading privileges in Surat.  In 1615Œ19 Sir 
Thomas Roe was sent as an Ambassador 
of the English King James I.  The Viceroy 
of Gujarat, Prince Khurram granted 

trading privileges, but the British could 
not operate freely because the Portuguese 
exercised a powerful influence in the 
region. 
Madras was ceded to East 
India Company in 1639 by the Raja of 

Chandragiri with permission to build a 
fortified factory which was named Fort 

St. George.  This was the first landholding 
recorded by the Company on Indian soil.  

96Charles VI died in 1740 and was succeeded 
by his daughter Maria ˜eresa. France 
did not support her succession and joined 
hands with German-speaking territories 
of Austria such as Bavaria, Saxony and 
Spain.   Frederick II (known as Frederick 

the Great of Prussia) taking advantage of 
the emerging political situation invaded 
and annexed Silesia, an Austrian province, 

with the support of France.  ˜e wars fought 
between Britain and France in Europe also 
led to clashes between these two countries 
over their colonial possessions in North 
America and India. 
When the war broke out, the 
new Governor of Pondicherry, Dupleix 

appealed to Morse, the Governor of 
Madras, to remain neutral. But a British 
squadron under Commodore Barnett 

captured some of the French vessels 
with Indian goods and 
precipitated the situation.  

Dupleix, shocked by 
this incident, appealed 
to Anwar- ud-din, the 
Nawab of Carnatic, to 
help him to avoid war 

with the English.  Calm 
prevailed for some time. 
Meanwhile Dupleix contacted La 
Bourdonnais, the French Governor of Isle 
of France, who appeared in the Indian 

waters with eight warships.  Peyton, who 
led the English squadron with his four 
ships, intercepted the French squadron 

and in the battle on 6 July 1746 Peyton 
suffered reverses and retreated to Hoogly, 
Calcutta expecting some more ships from 
Britain.   
Fall of MadrasThe French squadron succeeded in 
capturing the undefended Madras on 
15 September 1746.  Governor Morse 
was asked to surrender but the Madras 
Governor turned to Anwar-ud-din for 
became the future Calcutta.  The factory 
was fortified in 1696 and in 1698 the 

Company secured the zamindari rights 
over three villages, Sutanuti, Kalikata and 
Gobindpur in return for a payment of 

1200 rupees a year. The fortified factory 
was called Fort St. William which became 
the headquarters of the Presidency in 
1770.Norris Mission
Sir William Norris, sent by the English 
King William III in 1698, met Aurangzeb 

to get full English jurisdiction over the 

English settlements. ˜is was to con˚rm 

the existing privileges and to extend their 

trading rights further. But this request was 
conceded only during 1714-17, when a 
mission under Surman sent to the Mughal 
Emperor Farukhsiyar obtained 
˜rman
 (grant of trading rights) addressed to the 

local rulers of Gujarat, Hyderabad and 
Bengal. 
The Carnatic WarsThe British had to 
fight three wars (1746-
1763) with the French 
to establish their 
supremacy, which in 
history are called the 

Carnatic wars.
˜e Carnatic is a region in South India 
lying between the Eastern Ghats and 
the Coromandel Coast.  ˜is region 

constitutes the present day Tamil Nadu, 

eastern Karnataka, north-eastern Kerala 

and southern Andhra Pradesh.  
First Carnatic War 1746-48˜e Austrian War of Succession and Seven 
Years War fought in Europe had their 
repercussions in India. ˜e Austrian ruler 
Dupleix

97colonial powers could not live in peace in 
India.  They played one native ruler against 
the other. Dupleix wanted to enhance the 
French influence by involving in the wars 
of succession in both Hyderabad and 
Arcot.
Dupleix supported the claims of 
Muzzafar Jung, the grandson of Asaf Jah, 

who died in 1748 in Hyderabad, as the 

Nizam of Hyderabad.  In the Carnatic, 
he supported the claim of Chanda Sahib.  
A triple alliance was formed amongst 
the French, Nizam and the Nawab of 
Carnatic.  
The English, after losing Madras, 
a precious possession, had only Fort St. 

David under their control. In order to 
reduce the influence of the French, the 
English supported the rival candidates 

Nasir Jung for the throne of Nizam of 
Hyderabad and that of Muhammad Ali 
after the death of Anwar-ud-din in the 

Battle of Ambur in 1749.  
help. Dupleix was clever in convincing 

the Nawab that he was securing Madras 
from the British to be handed over to 
him.  On 21 September 1746 the English 

were forced to part with Madras. But 
when the Nawab of Carnatic asked the 
French to hand over Madras to him as 
promised, the French dodged. Thereupon 
the Nawab sent a force of 10,000 men 

under the command of his son Mahfuz 
Khan.
The Battle of San Thome and AdyarNawab™s forces blockaded Fort St. George 
but the French forces pushed the Nawab™s 
forces to San ˜ome.  ˜e French received 
reinforcement and Mahfuz Khan attempted 
to halt the progress of the French on the 
banks of river Adyar.  ˜e French forces 

were able to wade through the water and 
in˝ict a severe attack on the Nawab™s forces 
resulting in heavy losses. 
Dupleix then set his eyes on Fort St. 
David at Cuddalore which was in British 

possession.   The English, with the help of 
the Nawab of Arcot, was trying to regain 
the places lost but Dupleix again played 

a diplomatic game by promising that he 
would hoist the flag of the Nawab in the 
Fort St. George for a week and after that 
he requested the Nawab to hand over the 
town to the French. The Nawab agreed to 

withdraw his proposed help to the British.  
Two attempts of the British under Rear-
Admiral Boscowen to take Pondicherry 

failed.  By this time, in 1748, France and 
the English had signed the Treaty of Aix 
La Chapelle.  Under this treaty the British 
and the French ceased their hostilities in 
India.  It was agreed that the French would 

hand over Madras to the British in return 
for Louisburg in North America.  
The Second Carnatic War:  1749-54In Europe peace prevailed between the 
British and the French.  But the two 
Anandarangam Diary
Anandarangam (1709-1761), was born 
to a leading merchant of the time named 

Tiruvengadam Pillai. After his father™s 

death at Pondicherry, in view of the 

support given by the French Governors 

Dumas and Dupleix became the greatest 

merchant at Pondicherry. Dupleix 

appointed him the Chief Dubhashi (one 

who knows two languages) and Chief 

Commercial Agent (1746).  This enabled 

him to emerge as a man of substantial 

political influence at Pondicherry. But his 

real fame rests on his voluminous Diary 

in Tamil which is a very valuable source 

of history for the period from 1736 to 

1760, particularly for the Governorship 
of Dupleix. It is also a good summary of 
Anandarangam™s views and impressions 

on contemporary events. 

98Clive in the Second Carnatic WarDupleix was also determined to take over 
Tiruchirappalli with the help of Chanda 
Sahib.  Chanda Sahib™s troops were joined 
by 900 Frenchmen.  Muhammad Ali had 
only 5000 soldiers and not more than 600 
Englishmen to help him.  Robert Clive™s 
Arcot Nawab Muhammad Ali
˜e Battle of Ambur (1749)
˜e Battle of Ambur
:  Muza˜ar Jung, the 
contender for Nizami of Hyderabad, and 

Chanda Sahib, a claimant to the Nawabi of 

Carnatic, with the help of the disciplined 

French infantry in˚icted huge casualties 

on the Nizam and Anwar-ud-din™s forces.  

Anwar-ud-din was killed. Chanda Sahib 

entered Arcot as the Nawab. Muhammad 

Ali, son of Anwar-ud-din, escaped to 

Tiruchirappalli.  
The battle of Ambur was followed 
by the entry of victorious forces to 
Deccan.  Nazir Jung was killed by the 
French Army and Muzaffar Jung was made 
the Nizam of Hyderabad in December 
1750.  Dupleix™s dream of establishing a 
French empire appeared good for some 

time.  Dupleix received huge money and 
territories both from the Nizam and the 
Nawab of Arcot.  When Muzaffar Jung 

required French protection, Dupleix sent 
Bussy, the French general, with a large 
French force. Muzaffar Jung did not live 
long and the same people who killed Nasir 
Jung also killed him. Bussy promptly 

placed Salabat Jung, brother of Nazir 
Jung, on the throne.   In order to reduce 
the influence of British and also with a 
view to capturing Mohammad Ali (who 
fled to Tiruchirappalli after Anwar-ud-

din was killed) Chanda Sahib decided to 
take Tiruchirappalli, with the help of the 
French and the Nizam.  
Robert Clive was born in September 
29, 1725. He had no interest in studies 
and was expelled from three schools for 

his indiscipline and lack of interest in 

studies. However, Clive had developed 

notoriety for fighting. Disgusted by 

his behaviour his father secured him a 

writer™s post in the East India Company 

and sent him to Madras. Clive was later 

promoted as the governor of Fort St 

David and was involved in the Carnatic 

Wars and the siege of Trichinopoly.  

He won the Battle of Plassey in Bengal 

from where the British Empire came to 

evolve in India. Clive returned to India 

to take up his governorship and secured 

the Diwani rights from the defeated 

Mughal emperor in 1765. Clive amassed 

huge wealth and left India a fabulously 

rich man, with a personal fortune to 

the then value of 234, 000 pounds. This 

apart, his jagir in Bengal fetched him an 

annual rental income of 27,000 pounds. 

When he returned to England he faced 

a parliamentary inquiry over allegations 

of corruption. Though exonerated, Clive 

committed suicide.  
Robert Clive

99the American War of Independence), and 
West Africa (which later became the French 
West Africa). In India it manifested itself 
in the Third Carnatic war. Before turning 
our attention to the Third Carnatic War, 
let us see what happened in Bengal in the 

meantime.  
Battle of Plassey (1757)  ˜e East India Company abused the trade 

permits (
dastaks)
 granted by the Mughal 
Emperor by not paying taxes to the Nawab 

of Bengal, and by involving itself in internal 
trade. ˜is apart, the Company had given 
asylum to the son of the Nawab Siraj-

ud-daula™s hostile aunt. As the Company 
refused to oblige the Nawab, who demanded 
the return of his nephew, Fort St. William 

was captured and Europeans imprisoned. 
Responding to this situation, the Company 
at Fort St. George despatched a strong 
contingent under Robert Clive and Watson. 
˜e battle that ensued is called the Battle of 

Plassey.
It was alleged that 146 European prisoners 
were kept in a room measuring 18 by 
15 feet and it is said that all except 23 

prisoners died of suˆocation. ˜e veracity 

of this incident, known as the ﬁBlack Hole 

Tragedy of Calcuttaﬂ in British accounts, 

has been debated among historians.
Nawab Siraj-ud daula
idea changed the course of history.  He 
suggested the idea of storming Arcot 
when the French and the Nawab were 
busy concentrating on Tiruchirappalli. 
Clive moved from Fort St. David 
on 26 August 1752 with only 200 English 
and 300 Indian soldiers.  As expected 

the English received help from many 
rulers from small territories.  The Raja 
of Mysore and the ruler of Thanjavur 

rallied to support Muhammad Ali. 
Chanda Sahib dispatched a force of 
3000 under his son Raja Sahib to take 
Arcot. Clive seized Arcot on
 August
 31 
and then successfully withstood a 
 53-day siege by Chanda Sahib™s son, Raja 
Sahib, who was helped by the French 
forces.  In the battle of Arni the English 
and the Maratha ruler Murari Rao faced 

an unequal number of French and the 
forces of Nawab of Arcot.  In several 
battles that followed, including one 

at Kaveripakkam, Chanda Sahib was 
captured and executed.  Muhammed Ali 
became the undisputed ruler of Carnatic. 
In Europe Britain and France 
were not involved in any war and so 

neither of them approved the policy of 
their Companies fighting in India.  The 
French government recalled Governor 
Dupleix.  The Treaty of Pondicherry was 
signed in 1755 with the English; both 

countries agreed not to interfere in the 
quarrels of the Indian princes.  The Treaty 
also defined their mutual territorial 

possessions in India, a situation that was 
maintained for nearly two centuries until 
Indian independence.
The Third Carnatic War: 1756-1763The third Carnatic War was an echo of the 

Seven Years War (1756-1763) which broke 
out in Europe in 1756. It was a global 
conflict and was fought between the two 
arch-rivals Britain and France.  The war 
was fought in North America (resulting in 

100Shah Alam II and the Nawab of Oudh, 
Shuja-ud-daulah, who were equally 
aggrieved by the interference of the 
Company in their internal affairs. They 
declared war against the British. The 
battle was fought at Buxar (1764). By 

virtue of its superior armed the Company 
forces won the battle. The victory of the 
British led to the signing of the Treaty 

of Allahabad (1765) by Robert Clive 
with Shah Alam II. By this treaty the 
Company got the Diwani right to collect 
land revenue from the princely states 
of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. Besides, 

the Company obtained three districts, 
Burdwan, Chittagong and Midnapur, in 
Bengal and sovereignty over Calcutta. 
British virtually became the rulers of 
Bengal.
The battle of Plassey (1757) 
changed the position of the British 
from being a commercial power to that 
of a territorial power. It confirmed the 
privileges obtained by the Company and 
replaced Siraj-ud-daula with the betrayer 

Mir Jaffar.  The Company™s sovereignty 
over Calcutta was recognized and it 
was given sufficient land to maintain a 

military force.  Mir Jaffar also agreed for 
a Company™s resident in the court. Mir 
Jaffar was replaced by Mir Qasim and the 
latter tried to assert his independence, 
which was not to the liking of the 

Company officials. 
Battle of Buxar (1764)After fleeing from Bengal Mir Qasim 

aligned with the Mughal Emperor 
 Agra (E)
EUROPEAN TRADING CENTRESIN INDIAPatna (E)
Hoogli (E)Kolkata (E)
Chinsura (D)
Balasore (F)Yanam (P)
Masulipatnam (D)Pulicat (D)Chennai (E)Pondicherry (F)
Tranquebar (DA)Karaikal (F)Nagapattinam (D)Ahmedabad (E)Surat (E)
Daman (P)Tarapore (P)
Mumbai (E)Diu (P)Goa (P)Kannur (P)
Calicut (P)Cochin (P)PPortuguese
FFrench
EEnglish

DDutchDADanishTrading centres
Mahe (F)Broach (E)Lakshadweep islands(INDIA)Andaman and nicobar islands(INDIA)BAY OFBENGALARABIANSEAINDIAN OCEANMap not to scaleNSWE-----Chandranagore (F)
Sri Lanka
101sides suffered casualties. The French, 
however, could not continue with 
the siege as supplies were dwindling. 
Meanwhile General Pocock brought a 
fleet to the relief of Madras.  Lally was 
forced to lift the siege and fall back on 

Kanchipuram.   
The Battle of Wandiwash and the Fall of PondicherryLally retired to Pondicherry leaving a 
French contingent in Arcot.  The British 
moved towards Wandiwash but suddenly 
fell upon Kanchipuram and captured it.  A 
fresh detachment of British forces arrived 
under the command of Sir Eyre Coote.  

The last ditch battle was fought between 
Eyre Coote and Lally at Wandawashi 
(Wandiwash) in January 1760. Bussy 

was defeated and taken prisoner. Lally 
retreated to Pondicherry but it was not 
besieged immediately. Meanwhile the 
British captured Senji and proceeded to 
Pondicherry and laid siege to it. Lally 

had reorganized the defences and put 
up a heroic resistance to the British. The 
siege of Pondicherry continued for several 
months and finally on 4 February 1761 
Pondicherry fell. In the same year the 

British took control of Mahe, another 
French possession in the west coast. All 
French possessions were now lost. Finally, 

the hostilities came to an end with the 
signing of the Treaty of Paris (1763) at the 
end of the Seven Years War. Pondicherry 
and Chandranagore were restored to the 
French. The French had to henceforth 

be content with Pondicherry, Karaikal 
and Yanaon (Yanam) (all in Union 
Territory of Puducherry), Mahe (Kannur 
district in Kerala), and Chandranagore 
(Chandannagar in Bengal). The English 

emerged as the undisputed colonial power 
in India, changing from a trading company 
into that of a territorial power.  
Outbreak of Third Carnatic WarWith the outbreak of the Seven Years War, 

Clive captured Chandranagore, the French 
settlement in Bengal. With this the French 
in˝uence ended in Bengal. But they retained 
their power in the south. ˜e French 
government sent Count de Lally as the 

Supreme Commander of the French forces 
in India. As the British were active in Bengal, 
Lally promptly secured Fort St.˙David a˛er a 

short siege. Lally™s next move was ˜anjavur 
but the French were a˛er money from the 
Raja which he could not give. Without a 
penny the siege of ˜anjavur was li˛ed 
because there was a threat of British attack 

on Pondicherry.
Lally
Bussy
Sir Eyre Coote
Lally wanted Bussy to come 
from Hyderabad to help him to defend 
Pondicherry in the case of attack. Bussy 
le˛ Hyderabad and joined Lally.  In Deccan 
the political situation changed quickly and 
the French lost both Rajahmundry (1758) 

and Masulipatam (1759).  Salabat Jung, the 
Nizam of Hyderabad, without ˚ghting a 
battle signed an agreement with the British.  

˜e Nizam transferred Masulipatam and 
Northern Circars from the French to the 
English.  
The combined forces of Bussy 
and Lally captured Kanchipuram and 

proceeded to take Madras.  As the British 
were busy in Bengal, Madras had only 
about 800 Englishmen and 2500 Indian 
soldiers. The Siege of Madras began on 
12 December 1758.  The French could 

not progress till February 1759, but both 

102EXERCISE I. Choose the correct answer
 1. ______________ became the political headquarters for the Portuguese in India.
 a) Goa
 b) Diu c) Daman
 d) Surat
 2. ______________ was the gateway to west Asia and Europe.
 a) Diu b) Calcutta
 c) Bombay
 d) Surat
 3. The English got a piece of land from the local chief on which they built ______________ 
in 1639. a) Fort St. George
 b) Fort St. Williams
 c) Vellore Fort
 d) Golconda Fort
SUMMARYIAkbar™s expansion of his empire in Gujarat and Bengal facilitating his contact with 
European trading companies and the establishment of Dutch and English settlements with 
the consent of Akbar and Jahangir are narrated
During the corresponding period how the Nayak rule in south India, especially the Nayak 

kingdoms in Madurai, ˜anjavur and Senji had come about, are explained. Dutch Settlement 

in Pulicat with the permission of Nayak king in Senji is pointed out
Shivaji stalling Aurangzeb™s ambitious plans to extend his influence in south India and his 

victory over the Nayak rulers of Senji and Thanjavur facilitating Maratha rule in Thanjavur 
are highlighted
The establishment of successor states after the death of Aurangzeb, the moving of the 

Dutch from Pulicat to Nagapattinam, and the English moving from Surat to Bombay are 
dealt with
The economic condition of India during the period of survey of political developments 

(1600-1750), with focus on cotton cultivation in the field of agriculture, weaving in 

manufacturing sector and merchant groups involved in overseas trade are explained
Advent of Europeans and their collaboration with Indian merchants, laying the foundation 

for building a trading empire by the English are traced
IIPortuguese Settlements with Goa as headquarters and the impact of Portuguese presence 
in India, in particular in Tamilnadu, are elaborated
The Dutch East India Company™s activities with focus on slave trade are discussed
Pondicherry becoming French settlement and the rivalry between the French and the 
Dutch resulting in elimination of Dutch presence in the south are explained
The Danes establishing their Lutheran mission in Tranquebar and the role of Ziegenbalg 

as a missionary and the impact they made in the region are described
English East India Company™s rivalry with the French and the resultant three Carnatic 

Wars with focus on the leading roles played by Robert Clive on the side of the English and 
Dupleix on the side of the French are detailed
Battles of Plassey and Buxar that decisively made the British a territorial power in India 

are highlighted

103 4. ______________ region was famous for its painted (Kalamkari) fabrics which had designs 
drawn on the clothes and then dyed.
 a) Kanara
 b) Malabar
 c) Konkan
 d) Coromandel
 5. ______________ is associated with ﬁBlue Water Policyﬂ.
 a) Francisco d™ Almeida
 b) Albuquerque
 c) Nino da cunha
 d) Antonio de Noronha 
 6. ______________ is called the ﬁFather of Printing Pressﬂ.
 a) Fr. Roberto de Nobile
 b) Albuquerque
 c) Fr. Henriques
 d) Francisco  d™ Almeida
 7. ______________ was the Portuguese Black Town.
 a) Mylapore
 b) Santhome
 c) St. ˜omas Mount
 d) Pulicat
 8. ______________ were responsible for ﬁThe Amboyna Massacreﬂ.
 a) English East India Company
 b) Dutch East India Company
 c) Portuguese East India Company
 d) French East India Company
 9. ______________ served as the Coromandel headquarters of the Dutch East India 

Company.
 a) Karaikal
 b) Pulicat
 c) Masulipatnam
 d) Madras
 10. Francis Martin made ______________ the strategic centre of French settlements in India.
 a) Masulipatnam
 b) Nagapattinam
 c) Goa
 d) Pondicherry
 11. ______________ was inherited by Charles II as dowry, which he transferred to the English 

East India Company.
 a) Madras
 b) Calcutta
 c) Bombay
 d) Delhi
 12. During the First Carnatic War, ______________ was the Governor of Pondicherry.
 a) Peyton
 b) La Bourdonnais
 c) Dupleix
 d) Morse
 13. Robert Clive consolidated the British rule in India by winning the ______________
 a) Carnatic wars
 b) Seven Years™ Wars
 c) Battle of Buxar
 d) Battle of Plassey
 14. Battle of Wandiwash was fought between ______________
 a) Eyre Coote and Lally
 b) Robert Clive are Lally
 c) Eyre Coote and Bussy
 d) Robert Clive and Bussy
 15. ______________ concluded the Seven Years War.
 a) Treaty of Pondicherry
 b) Treaty of Allahabad
 c) Treaty of Paris
 d) Treaty of Srirangapatnam
 II. A Find out the 
correct
 statement
 1. The Europeans were quite aware of the wealth and power of the Mughals.
 2. The Dutch followed by the English arrived at Bombay.
 3. Thanjavur survived as a MughalŒruled state.
 4. Bombay, as an important trade centre, attracted merchants from Surat and other parts 

Odisha.

104  B   Find out the 
wrong
 statement
 1. Indian rulers admired foreigners and the Europeans took advantage of it.
 2. The Dutch were successful in the Spice Islands.
 3. Colbert was instrumental in establishing the French East India Company.
 4. The influence of the French can still be seen in Pondicherry.
 III. From the following statements, find out the correct answer.
 A i. The Battle of Plassey changed the British from a commercial power to that of a territorial 
power.
 ii.
 After the Battle of Wandiwash, the English emerged as a commercial power from that of a 

colonial power.
 a)  (i) is correct
 b)  (ii)  is correct
 c)  (i) and (ii) are correct 
 d)  (i)   and (ii)   are wrong
 B i. Albuquerque was the real founder of the Portuguese Empire in India.
 ii.
 Albuquerque attempted to stop the practice of Sati.
 a)  (i)   is correct
 b)  (ii)  is wrong
 c)  Both (i) and (ii)  are correct
 d)  Both (i) and (ii)  are wrong
 C  Assertion (A):
 Europeans had arrived in India in the 16
th Century
  Reason (R):
 Their intention was to procure pepper, cinnamon, cloves and other spices for 

European markets.
  a) A is correct; R is the correct explanation of A.
  b) A is correct; R is wrong.
  c) A is wrong; R is correct.
  d) A is correct; R is not the correct explanation A.
 D  Assertion (A):
 India had a strong manufacturing base and was particularly famous for the 

variety of cotton fabrics.
  Reason (R):
 Agriculture was the most important economic activity in the county.
  a)  A & R are correct.
  b)  A is correct; R is not the correct explanation of A.
  c)  A is correct; R is the correct explanation of A.
  d)  A & R are wrong.
 IV A) Which of the following pairs is wrongly matched.
 1. Tarangambadi
 - Danish
 2. Sir Thomas Roe
 - French
 3. Anwar-ud-din
 - Nawab of Carnatic
 4. Albuquerque
 - Portuguese

105  
B) Match the following.
 a. Zamorin
 - 1. Printing Press 
 b. Fr. Henriques
 - 2. Nizam of Hyderabad
 c. Muzaffar Jung
 - 3. Chanda Saheb
 d. Nawab of Arcot
 - 4. Ruler of Calicut
 a) 4, 1, 2, 3 b) 4, 3, 2, 1 c) 3, 2, 1, 4 d) 2, 1, 4, 3 V Write brief answer
 1. Why were the Nayak kingdoms setup?  What were they?
 2. How did the English establish their settlement at Madras?
 3. Write a note on craft manufacture.
 4. What do you know of shroffs and hundis?
 5. Name the first Portuguese viceroy in India.  Explain the policy that he introduced.
 6. What is meant by Cartaz system?
 7. Name the Dutch colonial forts and possessions in India.
 8. What is a factory?  List out the European factories established in the 16th Century.
 9. What were the causes for the outbreak of the First Carnatic War.
 10. Name the treaty signed in 1765.  What were its terms?
 VI Write short answer
s 1. The political condition in South India after 1565 
 2. The traders were not a homogeneous group Œ explain.
 3. What made the Europeans to set up their establishments on the east coast?
 4. ﬁThe expansion of demand for Indian textiles from Europe had an impact on the indigenous 
economyﬂ Œ How?
 5. Pulicat.
 6. Tarangambadi.
 7. The Battle of Ambur.
 8. Anandarangam Pillai Diary.
 VII Answer in detail
 1. Describe the impact of Portuguese presence in India.
 2. How did the English East India Company establish its trading rights in Madras, Bombay 

and Calcutta.
 3. Highlight the causes for the AngloŒFrench rivalry in the Carnatic region.
 4. ﬁThe British virtually became the rulers of Bengalﬂ Œ When and How?
 5. Attempt an account of Dupleix's career and achievements in India.
 VIII Activities
 1. On the outline map of India, mark the European trading centres.
 2. Visit Fort St. George Museum and prepare a report about your visit.
 3. Chennai Day and its associated activities.

106 IX Assignments
 1. Prepare an album, collecting pictures related to the Portuguese and French settlements.
 2. Write the biography of Robert Clive.
GLOSSARYrevamped changed something againdevastated destroyed
political turmoil a state of confusionincursiona sudden attackmetamorphosis a complete changestranded 
invincibilityimpossible to defeat  REFERENCES 1. Sinnappa Arasaratnam, 
Merchants, Companies and Commerce on the Coromandel 
Coast, 1650-1740
, Oxford University Press, New Delhi, 1986.
 2. Om Prakash, 
The New Cambridge History of India European Commercial Enterprise 
in Precolonial India
, Cambridge University Press, 1998.
 3. Sanjay Subrahmanyam, 
Improvising Empire: Portuguese Trade and Settlement in the 
Bay of Bengal, 1500Œ1700
, New Delhi, Oxford University Press, 1990.
 4. M. Manickam, 
Trade and Commerce in Pondicherry (A.D.1701-1793)
, Unpublished 

Ph.D. Thesis, Pondicherry University, 1995.
 5. Bipan Chandra, 
History of Modern India
, Orient Blackswan, New Delhi, 2009.  
 6. Danna Agmon, 
Traders, Missionaries and Tamil Intermediaries in the Eighteenth 
century French India
.  Ph.d thesis submitted in the department of Anthropology and 
History in the University of Michigan (US) 2011.
TIME LINE (AD/CE)First Carnatic War
1746-48Second Carnatic War
1749-54Battle of Ambur
1749Battle of Wandiwash
1760Third Carnatic War
1756-63Battle of Plassey
1757Battle of Buxar
1764
107THE COMING OF THE EUROPEANS
Let us learn about the 
‚Coming of the Europeans™
Procedure Step 1
  
Type the URL or scan the QR code to open the activity page.
 Step 2
  
Click on the Timeline given below to select the British period.
 Step 3
  
Scroll below to know about the coming of Europeans.
 Step 4
  
In another way, select  the ‚British India™ in the list  which is  
located at the right-side of the page.
 URL:https://www.timemaps.com/history/south-asia-1837ad/
https://is.muni.cz/do/law/kat/kupp/hrim/index.html
ICT CORNER
Step4
Step3
Step2
Step1
Pictures are indicative only
* if browser requires allow Flash Player or Java Script.

108Introduction The general breakdown of the central 
authority, in the wake of Mughal™s fall, 
resulted in a English trading company 
taking over India. Initially, the English 
East India Company™s focus was not on 
administration. Its aim was ensuring 

smooth trade. However, after the terrible 
Bengal famine of 1770, they began to 
exercise power with some responsibility. 

Not withstanding their exploitative 
economic policy, their professed objective 
was the safety of the people they governed 
and administration of justice. The 
justification for their expansionist policy 
was the extermination of tyranny of the 

local rulers and the harassment by robbers 
and marauders in the country. Railways 
and telegraph, introduced for easier 
communication, also served the purpose 
of curbing resistance and the control of the 

local population. However, their agrarian 
and commercial policies had a ruinous 
impact on the economy. India™s wealth 
was drained in several forms. By the 1830s 
there was large scale emigration of ruined 

peasants and weavers to plantations in the 
British Empire countries.
Effects of British Rule17Lesson
Learning ObjectivesTo acquaint oneself with the knowledge of
British East India Company's emergence as a territorial power
Failure of dual government established by Robert Clive and assumption of direct 
responsibility of the Company under Regulating Act of 1773
Cornwallis™ Permanent Settlement in Bengal and Thomas Munro™s Ryotwari 

System in Madras Presidency
Wellesley™s Subsidiary Alliance and Dalhousie™s Doctrine of Lapse leading to  

annexation of more number of Indian territories without war
The Company government™s relationship with Indian Rulers
Reforms in civil and judicial administration carried out by Cornwallis and 

Wellesley
Social and educational reforms and the building of rail and communication 

networks attempted by Bentinck and Dalhousie
Neglect of irrigation and exploitation of forest resources by the colonial state 

leading to frequent famines, forcing the peasants and artisans to move out of the 
country as indentured labourers
Drain of Wealth theory of Dadabhai Naoroji

10917.1  
Establishment of 
British RajBuxar was the real foundation battle 
for British dominion in India. Not only 
the Nawab of Bengal and Oudh, but the 
Mughal emperor ShahAlam II and his 
prime minister were also opposed to the 
British. As a result of the Battle of Buxar, 

the Company ceased to be a company 
of merchants and became a formidable 
political force. Under the pretext of 

corruption in Bengal administration 
Clive was appointed Governor of Fort 
William. Clive did not like his predecessor 
Vansittart™s decision restoring Oudh 
to Shah Alam. So he called for fresh 

negotiation with Shuja-ud-daulah. As a 
result of this, two treaties of Allahabad 
were signed. The emperor granted the 
Diwani (revenue administration) of 
Bengal, Bihar and Orissa to the Company. 

The emperor Shah Alam II was to get the 
districts of Allahabad and Kora, besides 
an annual allowance of 26 lakhs of rupees 

from the revenues of Bengal, Bihar and 
Orissa. The province of Oudh was restored 
to Shuja-ud-daula on the payment of war 
indemnity. The treaties held the Nawab of 
Bengal responsible for the governance of 

Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. 
       Robert Clive
  
     Warren Hastings
Before the emperor granted 
the Diwani to Clive, the Nawab of 
Bengal, successor of Mir Jafar, had 
practically transferred the Nizamat (civil 
administration) to the Company. So the 
Company had to function as Diwan and 
the Nizam. The Diwan™s duty included the 

collection of revenue and the control of 
civil justice. The Nizam™s function was to 
exercise military power and to dispense 
criminal justice. Thus the Company 
acquired the real power, while the 

responsibility of administration was with 
the Nawab. This arrangement is called 
Dual System or Double government or 
Dyarchy.  
But soon the dual system began 
to break down. Governance without 

responsibility led to the outbreak of a terrible 
famine in 1770. Nearly one third of Bengal's 

population perished. ˜e miseries of the 
province were intensi˚ed by the Company 
servants who had monopolized the sale of 
rice and realized huge pro˚ts. Finally, the 
Company realized its responsibility and 

passed the Regulating Act of 1773. Warren 
Hastings was appointed the Governor 
General of Bengal. 
˜e administrative head of East India 
Company was Governor (of Fort William 
or of Fort St. George) until 1772. Warren 

Hastings who was Governor of Fort 

William was made Governor-General of 

Bengal according to the Regulating Act 

of 1773. ˜e Charter Act 1833 designated 

this post as Governor-General of India 

and William Bentinck was appointed the 

˚rst Governor-General of united British 

India.  ˜e Governor-General was selected 

by the Court of Directors of the East India 

Company, to whom he was responsible.˛ 

A˝er the great rebellion of 1857, when the 

government of India was transferred from 

the East India Company to the Crown, the 

title ﬁViceroy and Governor-Generalﬂ was 

˚rst used in the queen™s proclamation of 

1858. Canning was the ˚rst Viceroy and 

Governor-General of India accountable to 

the British Parliament.

110Permanent Settlement was adopted. The 
districts of Chengalpattu, Salem and 
Dindigul were divided into a number of 
mittahs
 and sold to the highest bidders. 
Most of the purchasers, after fleecing the 
peasants, failed in the course of a year 

or two. The experiment was therefore 
abandoned.  Then the Board of Revenue 
tried a system of village leases.
Mahalwari was introduced in 1833 during 
the period of William Bentinck. Under the 
system the revenue settlement was made 

with the proprietor of the estate but the 

land revenue was collected from individual 

cultivators
Under the Village Lease system the 
assessment of each village was to be ˚xed 
for a period of three years based on the 
actual collections over a series of past years. 
In districts where 
mirasi
 rights existed, the 
mirasdar
 was made responsible for the rent 
collections. In districts where the 
mirasi
 rights did not exist, an arrangement was 
made with the village headman. ˜is system 
failed due to various reasons such as bad 

monsoons, low price of grains and the short 
period of lease. When crops failed entire 
villages defaulted and ˙ed without paying 
the revenue. ˜e government had to seek 
the help of the district collectors to bring 

back the peasants to the village.  
By 1814 the Court of Directors had 
decided to introduce the ryotwari system. 
˜is was a system formulated by Governor 
˜omas Munro. Under this system the ryot, 

an Anglicization by the British in India of 
the Arabic word˛
ra'yah, 
meaning a peasant 
or cultivator, was the proprietor and tax 
payer of the land. ˜e government dealt with 
him directly without the intervention of any 
middlemen. ˜e peasant was entitled to 
possession of land so long as he paid the land 
revenue. Apart from eviction, default could 
17.2  
Land Tenures: 
Permanent Settlement and Ryotwari SettlementThe Regulating Act of 1773 imposed on 
the court of Directors the legal obligation 
of informing all revenue transactions 
of the Company servants to the British 
Treasury. The Governor and Council 
consisting of the 

Commander-in-Chief 
and two counsellors sat 
as a Board of Revenue 

which discussed 
revenue matters. The 
Pitt India Act of 1784 
separated the civil and 
military establishments 

in India. 
Governor-General Cornwallis, 
himself a big landlord, wanted to create 
landlords after the British model in India. 
Cornwallis came to a settlement with 

the revenue farmers. This resulted in the 
creation of a new type of middlemen, 
called zamindars, reducing the cultivators 

to the position of mere tenants. This 
settlement that Cornwallis made with the 
zamindars of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa in 
1793, in pursuance of the instruction from 
the Directors, is called the Permanent 

Settlement. ‚Settlement™ refers to the 
assessment and fixing of the quantum of 
land revenue to be paid by each zamindar 
to the government. For Bengal, Bihar 
and Orissa, this was fixed permanently. 

Thus the zamindars who were originally 
tax collectors acquired hereditary rights 
over the land assigned by the government. 

The zamindars pocketed whatever they 
collected over and above the settlement.
The first quarter of the nineteenth 
century was a formative period in the land 

revenue history of the Madras Province. 
First after a great deal of deliberations 
Cornwallis

111administration of an 
Indian State, with its 
rulers retaining his title 
and receiving a fixed 
allowance.  
Before Wellesley, 
the Company concluded 

alliances with Indian 
princes. The Nizam and the Nawab of Oudh 

received subsidies for the maintenance 
of British contingents. Such forces were 
generally stationed outside the State 
concerned. Payment was made in cash. 
Difficulties arose when the payments were 

not promptly paid. Wellesley broadened 
the scope of this arrangement by his 
Subsidiary Alliance System, bringing 
under it Hyderabad, Mysore, Lucknow, the 
Maratha Peshwa, the Bhonsle (Kolhapur) 

and Sindhia (Gwalior).
The provisions of the Subsidiary 
Treaty are: (a) An Indian ruler entering 

into Subsidiary Alliance with the British 
had to dissolve his own armed forces 
and accept British forces and a British 
Resident in his territory. (b) He had to 
pay for the British army™s maintenance. If 

he failed, a portion of his territory would 
be taken away and ceded to the British. 
(c) The protected prince was to sever all 
connections with European powers other 
than the British, especially the French. 

(d) No European should be employed 
without the permission of the British. (e) 
No negotiation with any Indian power 

should be held without the Company™s 
permission and (f) No other Indian power 
to interfere in its internal affairs. Thus the 
states brought under the system became 
dependent on the Company in political 

and military matters, sacrificing their own 
sovereignty and status. 
The Subsidiary System increased 
the military resources and efficiency of 
the Company government. The immediate 
result in attachment of livestock, household 
property and personal belongings. ˜e 

government assessed the revenue of each 
cultivated ˚eld. ˜e revenue assessment 
was reviewed once in thirty years, taking 
into account the changes in grain prices, 
marketing opportunities, irrigation facilities 

and the like. ˜e ryotwari system introduced 
the concept of private property in land. 
˜e individual holders were registered and 

issued 
pattas.
 ˜ey were permitted to sell, 
lease, mortgage or transfer the right over 

land.
˜omas Munro: 
Munro arrived Madras in 
1780. In the ˚rst 12 years he was engaged 
in Mysore War as soldier. He worked in the 

Baramahal (Salem district) 
from 1792-1799 and 
Kanara from 1799-1800. 

He was collector of Ceded 

Districts: Kadapa, Kurnool, 

Chittoor, Anantapur. It was 

during this period that he 

conceived the idea of Ryotwari Settlement. 

In 1820 he became Governor of Madras 
Presidency and served for seven years. In 
1822 he oˆcially enforced the Ryotwari 

System in Madras. During his governorship, 

he gave attention to education and regarded 

any expenditure on it as an investment. He 

also emphasized the need for Indianization 

of the services. He died of Cholera at 

Pattikonda (Karnool district) in July 1827. A 
very popular governor, people constructed 
shrines in his honour, and named their 

children a˝er him. His statue was erected at 

Madras in 1839 by public subscription.
Thomas Munro
17.3  
Subsidiary Alliance 
and Doctrine of LapseGovernor General Wellesley (1798-1805) 
pursued a forward policy to establish 
British supremacy in India. His annexation 
of territories was not a result of victory in 
war. It was by assumption of the entire 
Wellesley

112was Satara. Shahji of Satara died (1848) 
and the son he adopted on the eve of his 
death was not recognized by Dalhousie. 
Gangadhar Rao, Raja of Jhansi died in 
November 1853 and Dalhousie annexed 
that state immediately. (His widow, Rani 

Lakshmi Bai, played a prominent role 
in the Great Rebellion of 1857.) Raghuji 
Bhonsle III died in 1853 without a child. 

Nagpur was immediately annexed.  In 
1851, the last Peshwa died. He had been a 
pensioner of the Company for thirty-three 
years, but Dalhousie refused to continue 
paying the pension to his son, the Nana 

Sahib. The Doctrine of Lapse, thus, served 
as an instrument for the pursuit of its 
annexation policy. When the Crown took 
over India in 1858 Doctrine of Lapse was 
withdrawn.
17.4  
Native States and British ParamountcyIn the aftermath of the Battle of Plassey 

(Palashi) (1757), when the Company 
embarked on its career of expansion, it 
established the system of dual government. 
Under this system, everything was sought 
to be done by the Company™s servants 

in the name of some powerless and 
dependent prince. In theory the Company 
was only the diwan (the collector of 

revenue), but in practice it exercised full 
authority. This authority was asserted by 
the refusal to continue the payment of 
annual tribute to the Mughal emperor Shah 
Alam promised by Clive. Cornwallis even 

stopped affirming obedience in letters to 
the emperor. Wellesley carried matters 
further with his objective of establishing 
British predominance through his 
Subsidiary Alliance System. Wellesley 

made subsidiary alliances with the three 
of the major States of India: Hyderabad, 
Poona and Mysore.
Hastings (Moira) who became 
Governor General in 1813 ordered 
result of this system was the discharge 

of thousands of professional soldiers 

by the political powers. The disbanded 
soldiers indulged in freebooting activities. 
Pindaris (marauders) began to swell on 
account of the Subsidiary System. In view 
of the guaranteed support to the Princes 

by the Company, the protective States 
mal-administered and paved the way for 
the annexation.  
Distinction between ‚Presidency™ and 
‚Province™: The British called Presidency 
the place where the office of Chief 

Administrative Head was situated. 

Madras, Bombay and Calcutta were 

the three Presidencies. Later when 

the Presidency became unwieldy for 

governance, they created provinces like 

Central and United Provinces.
Doctrine of LapseTraditionally Hindu 
custom allowed the 
adoption of a son in 
the absence of male 
heirs.  The adopted son 
had the right to inherit 

property. In this context 
the question raised was 
whether such an adopted prince holding 

the state subordinate to the Paramount 
Power (England) could succeed without 

the consent of the latter. Before Dalhousie™s 
arrival, the custom was to obtain the 
sanction of the Company government 
before or after adoption. Governor General 
Dalhousie held that the paramount power 
could legally refuse to sanction adoption 

in the case of rulers of States dependent on 
it. This meant that dependent States could 
be regarded as lapsed to the paramount 

power, by its refusal to sanction the 
succession of adopted sons. 
By applying this policy known as 
Doctrine of Lapse, the first state to fall 
Dalhousie

11317.5  
Reforms in Civil and Judicial AdministrationCornwallis organized company 
administration securing the services of 
William Jones, a judge and an Orientalist. 
He set up a machinery for the detection 
and punishment of crime, thereby ending 
the dual system of government established 

by Clive. The collection of revenue was 
separated from administration and justice. 
He deprived the collectors of their judicial 

function and confined them to revenue 
collection. Civil and criminal courts were 
thoroughly reorganized. At the top of the 
judicial system were the Sadar Diwani 
Adalat and the Sadar Nizamat Adalat. 

These two highest civil and criminal courts 
of appeal at Calcutta were presided over 
by the Governor General and his Council. 
Under them were four provincial courts of 
appeal at Calcutta, Deccan, Murshidabad 

and Patna. Each was to function under 
three European judges, aided by Indian 
advisers. Next came the District and City 

courts, each presided over by a European 
judge assisted by Indians. Every district 
and important city was provided with a 
court. At the bottom of the judicial system 
were courts under Indian judges, called 

munsifs. In civil cases, Muslim law was 
imposed and followed. In criminal cases, 
Hindu and Muslim laws were applied 
according to the religion of the litigants. 
The biggest contribution of 
Cornwallis was the reform of the civil 

services. Cornwallis provided scope for 
employing capable and honest public 

servants. He put an end to the old tradition 
of the civil service wherein the Company™s 
servants were given a small salary but were 
permitted to trade. Cornwallis appointed 
people solely on merit but considered 

that efficiency required the exclusion of 
Indians from the Company™s service.  
Every district was divided into 
thanas 
(police circles). Each thana was under a 
the removal of the phrase denoting 

the imperial supremacy from his seal. 
 He refused to meet Emperor Akbar II, unless 
he waived all authority over the Company™s 
possessions. But Hastings laid down a 
policy that the Company was in no way 

responsible for the administration of the 
Indian States. ˜us, under the Subsidiary 
System, each Prince was secure on his 
throne, notwithstanding the discontent of 
his people or by his jealous neighbours. In 

regions such as Kathiawar and Central India, 
divided among a great number of petty 
chiefs, the Company™s close supervision 
became indispensable for prompt action. 
The Company army helped the 
Indian rulers under the Subsidiary system 

to quell any rebellion or disturbance within 
the State. In Hyderabad, the authority of 

the Nizam did not prevail in certain areas, 
as the Arab troops lived without any 
control. The assistance of British troops 
helped reduce the Arabs to obedience. In 
Mysore state the financial management 

of the raja provoked a rebellion in 1830 
and the treaty of Wellesley only provided 
authority for the Company to interfere. 
William Bentinck, as Governor General, 
relieved the raja of all his powers and 

appointed Mark Cubbon to administer 
Mysore. In Gwalior, during a minority, the 
parties at the durbar quarrelled bitterly 

among themselves. The army of the State 
passed out of control. Ellenborough 
moved with a strong army, but the State 
army resisted. At the battle of Maharajpur, 
the State army was defeated and new terms 

of conditions including the limitation of 
the military forces maintained by it were 
imposed in 1843.
Dalhousie™s new method of 
annexing territories, Doctrine of Lapse, 

as we have seen, increased the territories 
under British domain.   Every accession 
of territory also increased the influence of 

the Company over the governments of the 
Indian princes. 

114˜e Company held the view that it was not 
desirable in its own interests to encourage 
education in India. In 1813, when the 
Company Charter was renewed, it contained 
a clause intended to force on the Company 
the initiative for a regular educational policy. 

Hastings encouraged the foundation of 
vernacular schools by missionaries. He was 
the patron of the Hindu College, established 

at Calcutta in 1817, supported by the Indian 
public for the teaching of English and of 
Western science. ˜e cause of education 
was further promoted by missionaries like 
Alexander Duˇ. ˜anks to Hastings™ liberal 

outlook, press censorship instituted in 1799 
was abolished. It was in such an atmosphere 
that the Bengali Weekly, the 
Samachar  
Darpan
 was started in 1818.
˜e Charter of 1833 emphasized the 
development of the country primarily in the 
interest of its inhabitants. William Bentinck, 
appointed the ˚rst Governor General 

of united India reformed the society by 
suppressing thuggee (robbery and murder 
committed by the thugs in accordance with 
their ritual), abolishing sati and introducing 
English as the medium of instruction in 

schools and colleges. ˜is he thought would 
facilitate Indianization of the services. 
Bentinck founded the Calcutta Medical 
College in March 1835. ˜e students of 
this college were sent to London in 1844 

to complete their studies.  Ten years a˝er 
the establishment of the Calcutta Medical 
College, the Grant Medical College in 

Bombay was founded in 1845. In 1847 the 
˜omason Engineering College at Roorkee 
(now IIT Roorkee) came into existence. 
In 1849 a school for girls was founded in 
Calcutta.
Macaulay came to India as a law 
member in 1835. He was appointed 

President of the Board of Education. He 

had a poor opinion of indigenous learning. 
Macaulay recommended and government 
accepted to make English the literary and 

official language of India. 
daroga
, an Indian oˆcer. Cornwallis™ police 
system was further improved under Warren 
Hastings. ˜e rigid separation of judicial and 
revenue powers was given up. ˜e Collector 
began to function as Magistrate as well. 
Cornwallis, who toned up the civil 
and criminal administration, however, did 

not pay adequate attention to the education 
of Company servants. It was Wellesley 

who emphasized the need for educating 
and training them. Wellesley thought the 
civilians should have a knowledge of the 
languages, laws, customs and manners and 
history of India, in addition to their liberal 

education in England. With this object, 
the College of Fort William was founded 
at Calcutta in 1800. A three year course 
of study was provided for the Company™s 
civil servants. The college was staffed by 

European professors and eighty Indian 
pundits. This became the Oriental School 
for Bengal civilians. In 1806 the East India 

College was established in England.  In 
Madras, the College of Fort St George was 
set up by F.W. Ellis in 1812 on the lines of 
College of Fort William. It was here that 
the theory that the South Indian languages 

belonged to a separate family of languages  
independant of Sanskrit was formulated.
17.6  
Education and 
Development under Company RuleEducation˜e establishment of a 
Madrasa
 by a learned 
maulvi with the support of Warren Hastings 
was the beginning of initiatives of British 
government to promote education. ˜is 
Madrasa started with forty stipendiary 
students. What Warren Hastings had done 

for the Muslims, his successor was prepared 
to do for the Hindus. Cornwallis established 
a Sanskrit college (1791) in Benares. ˜e 

successive governors in the next twenty 
years, however, did nothing to follow it up. 

115Dalhousie showed keen interest 
in education. He approved of the system 
of vernacular education designed by 
James Thomason, Lieutenant Governor 
of the North-Western Provinces (1843-
53). The Educational Dispatch of Charles 

Wood (1854) outlined a comprehensive 
scheme of education-primary, secondary, 
collegiate. Departments of Public 

Instruction and a university for each of 
the three Presidencies were organized for 
the purpose.  University of Madras was 
established under this plan (1857), along 
A charter is a grant by a country™s 
sovereign power to start a company, 
university, or city with rights and 

privileges clearly stated. The East India 

Company was started with Queen 

Elizabeth™s Charter of 1600. It came to be 

renewed every twenty years, after Warren 

Hastings took over as Governor General 

since 1773. The Charter of 1853 was the 

last one before the Company government 

was taken over by the Crown.
Macaulay found nothing good in Indian literature, philosophy and 
medicine. Macaulay, in his minute of 1835 wrote: ‚I have no knowledge of 
either Sanskrit or Arabic. But I have read translations of the most celebrated 
Arabic and Sanskrit works. I have conversed both here and at home with 
men distinguished by their pro˚ciency in the Eastern tongues. I have 
never found one among them who could deny that a single shelf of a good 
European library was worth the whole native literature of India and Arabia. 
... ˜e question now before us is simply whether, when it is in our power 
to teach this language, we shall teach languages in which, by universal 

confession, there are no books on any subject which deserve to be compared to our own, whether, 

when we can teach European science, we shall teach systems which, by universal confession, 

wherever they diˇer from those of Europe diˇer for the worse, and whether, when we can 

patronize sound philosophy and true history, we shall countenance, at the public expense, medical 

doctrines which would disgrace an English farrier, astronomy which would move laughter in 

girls at an English boarding school, history abounding with kings thirty feet high and reigns 

thirty thousand years long, and geography made of seas of treacle and seas of butter.
... It is said that the Sanscrit and the Arabic are the languages in which the sacred books of a 
hundred millions of people are written, and that they are on that account entitled to peculiar 

encouragement. Assuredly it is the duty of the British Government in India to be not only tolerant 

but neutral on all religious questions. ... We abstain, and I trust shall always abstain, from giving 

any public encouragement to those who are engaged in the work of converting the natives to 

Christianity. And while we act thus, can we reasonably or decently bribe men, out of the revenues 

of the State, to waste their youth in learning how they are to purify themselves a˝er touching an 

ass or what texts of the Vedas they are to repeat to expiate the crime of killing a goat?
... We must at present do our best to form a class who may be interpreters between us and the 
millions whom we govern,˛-a class of persons Indian in blood and colour, but English in tastes, 

in opinions, in morals and in intellect. To that class we may leave it to re˚ne the vernacular 

dialects of the country, to enrich those dialects with terms of science borrowed from the Western 

nomenclature, and to render them by degrees ˚t vehicles for conveying knowledge to the great 

mass of the population.
Macaulay

116became approvers. By 1860 the problem 
of thuggee had ceased to exist.
Thuggees
Abolition of Sati
Bentinck showed great courage and 
humanity by his decision to abolish˜
sati
, the practice of burning widows alive with 

the corpses of their husbands. Previous 
governors-general were reluctant to 

prohibit the custom as an interference 
in religion but Bentinck enacted a law 
(Sati Abolition Act, 1829) to put an end 

to this practice. Raja Rammohan Roy™s 
campaigns and efforts played a decisive 
part in getting this inhuman practice 
abolished.  
Railways, Postal & Telegraph SystemsThe first serious proposal for constructing 
railways was made by the European 
business community. The Directors 
were doubtful whether railways could 
be successfully built in India. Governor 
General Dalhousie however persuaded 

them arguing that the railways would 
bring very considerable economic 
advantage. Yet before the Great Rebellion 

less than three hundred miles of track had 
been laid.
Though several proposals for 
the laying of telegraph communication 
between India and London were put 

forward, the telegraph service was 
inaugurated only in 1854. During the 
with universities in Bombay and Calcutta. 
Dalhousie modified the policy of Macaulay 
by encouraging educational institutions 
in vernaculars too. He also agreed to the 
principle of grants-in-aid to private effort, 
irrespective of caste or creed. 
17.7  
Efforts at Safety and Developmental MeasuresPindari WarPindaris were freebooters composed 
of both Muslim and Hindu bands. The 
Subsidiary Alliance of the Company had 
led to the disbandment of thousands of 
soldiers and most of them joined them and 
swelled their numbers in central India. 

The British proclaimed Pindari War. But 
it turned out to be a war against Marathas 
and the outcome of this prolonged war 

(1811 to 1818) was that the whole of 
Central India came under British rule.
William Bentinck
The villagers burning 
themselves to avoid Pindaris
Suppression of ThuggeeThe Thugs were robbers operating 
between Delhi and Agra from the 
fourteenth century. They were bound 
together by oaths and ritual and murdered 
unsuspecting travellers in the name of the 
goddess Kali.˜ Bentinck placed William 

Sleeman in charge of the operation to 
eliminate the Thuggee menace. Between 
1831 and 1837 more than three thousand 

Thugs were convicted. Five hundred 

117dam across the Kollidam 
(Coleroon) in 1836. In 
1853, a dam across the 
Krishna river had also 
begun. In the north, 
before the takeover of 

India by the Crown, 
Jumna canal was 
completed in 1830 and by 1857 the Ganges 

canal had been extended to nearly 450 
miles. In the Punjab area the Bari Doab 
canal had been excavated by 1856. But the 
canal water contributed to soil salinity 
and water logging causing great ecological 

distress. 
ForestsLand revenue was the mainstay of the 

British Indian government™s ˚scal system. 
˜erefore, in their eˇort to extend the 
areas of cultivable land, forests were 
destroyed. Zamins were created out 
of Jungle Mahal forests and auctioned 

oˇ for regular cultivation. ˜e original 
inhabitants of this region, the Santhals 
were evicted. ˜erefore it was the Santhals 

who were the ˚rst tribal group to resist the 
British rule in India. Slope cultivation was 
encouraged in the hilly and mountainous 
tracts. Land was provided to European 
enterprises at a throwaway price for slope 

cultivation. Further, in their enthusiasm 
to try plantation crops, zamindars and 
Indian rulers destroyed the forests. Coˇee, 
for instance, did not grow in many places. 
Yet in the process of attempting coˇee 

cultivation large tracts of virgin forests 
were destroyed. Timber came to be 
exploited with the massive construction 

of the railway system. In the 1870s, it was 
calculated that every year one million 
sleepers were needed to build railway 
tracks. Indian trees, particularly 
sal, 
deodar
, and 
teak
, were preferred for their 
strength over other Indian timbers. ˜ese 

three species were intensively exploited. 
Much sal was extracted from the forests 
Great Rebellion of 1857 its importance  

was realised. In the aftermath of 1857, it 
became an urgent necessity. The time of 
communication between London and 
Calcutta came down from several days to 
twenty eight minutes. With the opening of 

Suez Canal in 1869, the journey between 
Europe and India was reduced by some 
4000 miles. By1870 the government of 
British India was in effective contact with 
Secretary of State, India Office, London. 

Subsequently, with the exception of 
Curzon, Governor Generals were reluctant 
to do anything without seeking the 

permission of Whitehall, the headquarters 
of the East India Company.
IrrigationThe British neglected irrigation. The 
irrigation channels and tanks built by 
Indian rulers fell into disuse and there was 
little effort on the part of the Company to 
undertake repairs or renovation works. 
In˛Madras, as we will see in the following 

section, a few irrigation works were carried 
out because of the personal enthusiasm of 
Arthur Cotton, an Engineering officer. 

Against much opposition, Cotton built a 
Arthur Cotton
˜e railway line from Bombay to ˜ane 
was opened in 1853; from Howrah to 
Raniganj in 1854-55. ˜e ˚rst railway line in 

south India ran from Madras to Arakonam 

in 1856. Royapuram was one of the railway 

stations inaugurated in that year.
First Train: Bombay to Thane

118Large numbers of weavers were thrown out 
of employment and forced to seek livelihood 
in agriculture, which increased the pressure 
on the already overcrowded land.
Charles Travelyan to a Select Committee 
of the House of Commons in 1840 made 
the following observation: ˜e peculiar 

kind of silky cotton formerly grown in 

Bengal, from which the ˚ne Dacca muslins 

used to be made, is hardly ever seen. ˜e 

population of the town of Dacca has fallen 

from 150, 000 to 30, 000 or 40,000 and the 

jungle and malaria are fasten croaching 

upon the town. – Dacca, which was the 

Manchester of India has fallen oˇ from a 

very ˙ourishing town to a very poor and 

small one; the distress there has been very 

great indeed.™  
Abbe Dubois, a French 
Catholic missionary, 

before his return to 
Europe in 1823 wrote: 
‚misery and desolation 

prevailed everywhere 

and that thousands of weavers were dying 

of hunger in the diˇerent districts of the 

Presidency [Madras].™ ‚˜e misery hardly 

˚nds parallel in the history of commerce–. 

˜e bones of cotton weavers are beaching 

the Gangetic plains of India,™ said the 

Governor General William Bentinck.
Contrasting Muslim rule with British 
governance William Bentinck himself 
acknowledged the benevolent nature of 
the former. ‚In many respects™, Bentinck 
wrote, ‚the Muhammedans surpassed our 
rule; they settled in the countries which 
they conquered; they intermarried with 

the natives; they admitted them to all 
privileges, the interests and sympathies 
of the conquerors and conquered became 

identical. Our policy on the contrary, has 
been the reverse of thisŒ cold, selfish and 
unfeeling.™   
of the Jungle Mahals of West Bengal and 
Bihar.  Timber went to England too for the 

building of railways. ˜e myth that India™s 
forests were inexhaustible was exploded. 
It was in this background that the colonial 
state, in order to manage and control forest 
resources, started the Forest Department 

and passed the Indian Forest Act, 1865. 
˜is was a draconian act which restricted 
the use of forest resources by indigenous 

groups who resented it. In order to contain 
protest and resistance the British enacted 
the dreaded Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
During the entire colonial period there 
were frequent insurrections by tribal 

people against the colonial state. ˜e 
legacy of the colonial forest acts continues 
to haunt contemporary times as well.
17.8  
Deindustrialization and Drain of WealthEurope had always imported more from 

the East than was exported here. ˜ere was 
little that the East required from the West 
in return for the spices, silks, calicos, jewels 
and the like it sent there. ˜e industrial 
revolution in textile production that took 

place in England reversed this relationship 
for the ˚rst time. India was systematically de-
industrialized. Rather than being the world™s 

leading exporter of cloth and textiles, India 
became a market for Lancashire cottons. 
Cheap machine-made British goods led 
to the ˙ooding of Indian markets. Indian 
cotton piece goods began to lose ground 

gradually given that machine-made goods 
were more durable and cost less. 
˜e Company government, in the 
˚rst three decades, followed a policy of 
allowing unrestricted ˙ow of imports of 

British goods into India. Without any import 
duty English goods were much cheaper than 
domestic products. At the same time, Indian 

manufactures were shut out from the British 
market by high protective duties. ˜is policy 
ruined the Indian weavers and traders. 

119˚ve million died. By 1901, Romesh Chunder 
Dutt, a former ICS oˆcer and a staunch 
nationalist, enumerated 10 mass famines 
since the 1860s, putting the total death toll 
at 15 million. 
The laissez faire (non-intervention) 
principles to which the colonial state was 

committed since 1833 was applied to 
famines also. For years, western-educated 

Indians had argued that British rule 
was grossly impoverishing India. The 
Orissa famine, in which one third of the 
population died of starvation and disease, 
served as a patent proof of this thesis. It 

prompted nationalist Dadabhai Naoroji, 
to begin his lifelong investigations into 
Indian poverty.
An eye witness (an Englishman) of the 
terrible famine in the Guntur district 
of Madras Presidency in 1833 said: ‚It 

is dreadful to see what revolting food 

human beings may be driven to partake 

of. Dead dogs and horses are greedily 

devoured by these surviving wretches; 

and the other day, an unfortunate donkey 

having strayed from the fort, they fell 

upon him like a pack of wolves, tore him 

limb from limb and devoured him on the 

spot.™
Madras Famine of 1876-78: The 
failure of two successive monsoons caused 
a severe famine in the Madras Presidency 

during 1876-78. The viceroy Lytton 

adopted an hands-off approach similar to 
that followed in Orissa. 3.5 million people 
died in the presidency. 
˜e introduction of plantation crops 
and slope cultivation in Ceylon, Mauritius, 

Fiji, Malaya, the Caribbean islands, Natal 

and South Africa required enormous labour. 
Initially slave labour was used for this 
purpose. But a˝er the Company government 
abolished slavery in India (1843), the 
system of indentured was used. Under this 
Military and civil administrative 
costs in British India consumed an 

average of eighty per cent of the 
budget, leaving twenty per cent to be 
divided among the various departments 
concerned. Agriculture was left to its 
deteriorating condition. Irrigation was 

neglected. Arthur Cotton wanted the 
colonial state to give priority to irrigation 
rather than building railway network, but 

his suggestion was turned down by the 
imperial goverment in England. Outbreak 
of successive famines in the last quarter 
of the nineteenth century ultimately 
prompted the government under British 

Crown to initiate some steps for the 
building of dams. 
The Ryotwari system intended 
to create a large body of independent 
peasants, who would be protected from 

the ﬁcorrupt and faithless zamindar,ﬂ 
however, in reality achieved the contrary 
result of strengthening the position of the 

big landlords. The government showed 
little interest in protecting the interests of 
tenants in ryotwari areas. Since land was 
the main source of revenue, its rigorous 
collection became an imperative policy 

of the British. The Torture Commission, 
appointed by the Company government 
in Madras in its report presented in 1855 
exposed the atrocities perpetrated by the 
Indian revenue and police officials in 

the process of collecting land tax from 
the cultivators. The Torture Act which 
justified forcible collections of land 

revenue was abolished only after 1858. 
17.9  
Famines and 
Indentured labourFamine, though no stranger to India, 

increased in frequency and deadliness with 
the advent of British colonial rule. Between 
1800 and 1825, there were only four famines. 
But in the last quarter of the century there 
were 22 famines. It is estimated that over 

120Drain of WealthDadabhai Naoroji in his 
Poverty and Un-
British Rule in India
 explained how the 
English rulers were di˜erent from the earlier 

invaders. He said, in the case of former 
foreign invaders, they plundered and went 
back. ˚ey made, no doubt, great wounds, 

but India, with her industry, revived and 
healed the wounds. When the invaders 
became rulers of the country they settled 
system, labourers were hired on contract 

for a period of ˛ve years (indenture) and 
they could return to their homeland with 
passage paid at the end. Many impoverished 
peasants and weavers went hoping to earn 
some money. But in e˜ect it was worse than 

slave labour. ˚e colonial state allowed 
agents (
kanganis
) to trick or kidnap indigent 
landless labourers. 150 indenture labourers 
ﬁthe innocent victims of a new system of 
slaveryﬂ were ˛rst taken from ˚anjavur in 
1828 to the new British co˜ee plantations 
in Ceylon. All of them deserted. ˚erefore, 
recruitment coupled with criminal laws 

prohibiting desertion started in the 1830s. 
People courted this new form of slavery to 
escape starvation deaths.
In 1815, the Governor of Madras 
received a communication from the 

Governor of Ceylon (Sri Lanka) asking for 
coolies to work on the co˜ee plantations. 
˚e Madras Governor forwarded this letter 

to the collector of ˚anjavur, who a˝er 
enquiry reported back saying that the people 
were very much attached to the soil and 
hence unless some incentive was provided it 
was not easy to make them move out of their 

native soil. But the outbreak of two famines 
(1833 and 1843) forced the people, without 
any prompting from the government, 
to leave for Ceylon to work as coolies in 
co˜ee and tea plantations under indentured 

labour system. During 1843-1868, nearly 1.5 
million people (1,444,407) had gone from 
Madras to Ceylon as indentured labourers.  
Famine in Madras
Famine in Orissa
Indentured labourers
Indentured Labour System: It was a penal 
contract system, totally di˜ering from the 
contractual labour system of the present 

day.  According to the Indentured Labour 

System, the coolie (the term applied to an 

Indian indentured labourer) had to work 

in jail-like condition, was punishable  by 

forfeiture of wages or imprisonment for 

(a) negligence of duty or refusal to attend 

to work (b) insolence or disobedience of 

orders or other misconduct (c) quitting 

service before the expiry of the contract. 

By invoking one of these provisions the 

planters on the ˙imsiest pretexts invariably 

either deprived the labourers of their wages 

or  put them behind bars. ˚e contract 

prohibited the formation of associations by 

coolies either with the objective of claiming 

increase in wages or for termination of their 

contract.  ˚e Plight of women in plantations 

is described poignanatly in Bharati™s  famous 

song ‚Karumbu thottathile™

121Expenses on wars fought in India and 
interests for the loans obtained from 
the banks for the conduct of wars and 
for the building of railroads.
India™s loan to England was 130 million 

pounds in 1837. It increased to 220 million 
pounds, of this 18 percent was for conducting 
wars waged against Afghanistan and Burma. 

A government report of 1908 informed that 
on account of railways, India had incurred 
a debt of 177.5 million pounds. In order to 
give outlet to the saturated capital the British 
secured the capital from private enterprise in 

England. In the form of guaranteed interest 
of 5 percent, the Colonial state promised to 
repay the interest in sterling.  ˜ere was a 

loss of 220 million pounds to India on this 
score.
Calling this as drain of wealth 
Dadabhai Naoroji lamented that had the 
money drained to England remained in 

the pockets of Indians, India would have 
economically progressed. Even Gazni 
Mahmud™s pillage stopped after eighteen 
times but the British plunder seemed 
to be unending, he quipped.  R.C. Dutt 

estimated that during the last decade of 
the reign of Queen Victoria (1891-1901), 
of the total income 647 pounds, 159 

million pounds drained to England. This 
worked to 44 percent of the total income 
of the country.  
down in it; whatever was the condition of 

their rule, there was at least no material 
or moral drain in the county. But with the 
English the case was diˇerent. ˜ere are the 
great wounds of the ˚rst wars in the burden 
of the public debt and those wounds are kept 

perpetually open and widening by draining 
away the lifeblood in a continuous stream. 
˜e former rulers were like butchers hacking 

here and there, but the English with their 
scienti˚c scalpel cut to the very heart, and 
yet, there is no wound to be seen, and soon 
the plaster of the high talk  of civilization, 
progress and what not covers up the wound. 
Naoroji argued 
that a great deal of 

wealth was drained to 
England in the form 
of Home Charges. The 

following constituted 
the Home Charges: 
Incentive to the 
shareholders of the 
Company
Savings and the salaries of European 
officials, European traders and 
Planters remitted to England.
Pensions to those who retired from 
civil and military services.
The salaries of the staff and the 

Secretary to Home Government, India 
Office at London
SUMMARYThe consequences of ﬁassumption of power without responsibilityﬂ by the Company 
are highlighted
Bringing more Indian territories under British domain through Subsidiary Alliance 

and Doctrine of Lapse is explained
Zamindari land tenures and Permanent Settlement in Bengal and the Ryotwari 

System in Madras Presidency are discussed
Company government™s indirect rule in states like Hyderabad, Pune and Mysore is 

described
Dadabhai Naoroji

122EXERCISE I. Choose the correct answer
 1. __________ was the real foundation battle for British dominion in India.
 a) Plassey
 b) First Carnatic War
 c) Buxar
 d) Wandiwash
 2. According to the __________ treaty, Shah Alam II granted the Diwani of Bengal, Bihar 
and Orissa to the company.
 a) Allahabad
 b) Madras
 c) Poona
 d) Pondicherry
 3. __________ introduced the Dual system in Bengal.
 a) Warren Hastings
 b) Dupleix
 c) Cornwallis
 d) Robert Clive
 4. __________ was passed to regulate the Company affairs in India.
 a) Regulating Act (1773)
  b) ˜e Pitt India Act (1784)
 c) Charter Act (1813)
  d) Charter Act (1833) 
 5. __________ was the first Viceroy and Governor General of India accountable to the 

British Parliament.
 a) Cornwallis
 b) Canning
 c) Wellesley
 d) Hastings
 6. Cornwallis made the Permanent Settlement with the Zamindars of __________.
 a) Mysore
 b) Bombay
 c) Bengal
 d) Madras
 7. __________ introduced the ryotwari System.
 a) Cornwallis
 b) ˜omas Munro
 c) Robert Clive
 d) Warren Hastings
 8. The British officer who ended the menace of Thuggee was __________
 a) William Adam
 b) William Sleeman
 c) James Holland
 d) John Nicholson
 9. __________ was the first state to fall under the policy of Doctrine of Lapse.
 a) Nagpur
 b) Oudh
 c) Jhansi
 d) Satara
 10. __________ justified forcible collection of land revenue.
 a) ryotwari Act
 b) Pitt India Act
 c) Permanent Settlement Act
 d) Torture Act
Changes effected in civil and judicial administration are highlighted
Socio-cultural and educational reforms and developmental programmes of 
successive governor generals are examined
How railways and telegraph enabled the British to have closer control of the people 

they governed is explored
Company government™s exploitative agrarian and commercial policies, resulting in 

outbreak of terrible famines forcing the peasants and artisans to emigrate to British 
Empire colonies to work on plantations as indentured labourers, are elaborated. 
Dadabhai Naoroji™s analysis of drain of wealth is dealt with.

123 11. __________ introduced English as the literary and official language of India.
 a) Cornwallis
 b) William Bentinck
 c) Macaulay
 d) ˜omas Munroe
 12. Madras University was established in __________.
 a) 1837 b) 1861 c) 1844 d) 1857 13. The efforts of __________ played a decisive part in getting the practice of 
sati 
abolished.
 a) Warren Hastings
  
 b) William Jones
 c) Raja Rammohan Roy
  d) Dayanand Saraswati
 14. The first railway line in south India ran from Madras to __________ in 1856.
 a) Vaniampadi
 b) Katpadi
 c) Villupuram 
 d) Arakonam
 15. With the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869, the journey between India  and Europe was 
reduced by __________ miles.
 a) 400 b) 3000 c) 4000 d) 8000 II. Find out the 
correct
 statement.
 A 1. The Governor General was selected by the Court of Directors of the East India Company.
 2. The Subsidiary System decreased the military resources and efficiency of the Company.
 3. The establishment of the 
Madrasa
 by Lord Wellesley was the beginning of British 
Government to promote education.
 4. Lord Dalhousie founded the Calcutta Medical College in March 1835.
 B  Assertion (A): The British Government initiated steps for the building of dams.
  Reason (R):
 There were successive famines in last quarter of the 19
th Century.
  a) A is correct; R is wrong.
  b) A is correct R is not the correct explanation of A.
  c) A is correct; R is the correct explanation of A
  d) A is wrong; R is correct
 III. A) Which of the following pairs is wrongly matched?
 1. Gangadhar Rao
 - Jhansi
 2. Raghuji Bhonsle
 - Nagpur
 3. Shaji
 - Satara
 4. Scindia
 - Kolhapur

124 B. Match the following
 a) Arthur Cotton
 - 1) Sanskrit College
 b) William Sleeman
 - 2) Kollidam
 c) William Bentinck
 - 3) Thuggee Menace
 d) Cornwallis
 - 4) Abolition of Sati Act
 a)  4, 1, 2, 3 b)  2, 3, 4, 1 c)  3, 2, 1, 4 d)  2, 1, 4, 3 IV.
 Give brief answers
 1. The Regulating Act, 1773.
 2. Governor Thomas Munro.
 3. Distinction between ‚Presidency™ and ‚Province™.
 4. ﬁThe biggest contribution of Cornwallis was in the field of civil servicesﬂ Œ Explain.
 5. Write a note on irrigation development under the British.
 6. Write a note on Dacca Muslin.
 7. ﬁDrain of wealth impoverished Indiaﬂ Œ How?
 V. Write short note of the following
 1. ﬁDual Systemﬂ.
 2. How did the Zamindars acquire hereditary rights over the lands assigned by the 
Government?
 3. Doctrine of Lapse.
 4. Reforms of Cornwallis in judicial administration.
 5. Dispatch of Charles Wood.
 6. Pindaris and Thuggees.
 7. Impact of Industrial Revolution on Indian handloom weavers.
 8. Indentured Labour System.
 VI. Answer in detail
 1. Explain the Subsidiary Alliance introduced by Lord Wellesley.
 2. What was the nature of educational development under Company™s Rule?
 3. Narrate the circumstances leading to the passing of the Indian Forest Act, 1865 and point 

out its effects.
 VII. Activities
 1. Compare and contrast the Railways and Post & Telegraph Systems of the British with that 

of India.
 2. Arrange a debate on the advantages and disadvantages of British colonialism in India.
 VIII. Assignment
 1. Prepare a comprehensive report on the drain of wealth by the British in India.
 2. ﬁThe network of Indian Railways in India owes its origin to the Britishﬂ Œ Narrate the 

recent attempts at modernization in this sector in India.

125GLOSSARYin pursuancea follow upscalpelsurgical knifecontingenta part of a military forcecededgranting of some possessions
paramountsupremefarrier
plates for horse™s feet
draconianheartlessinsurrectionrebelliondevouredto eat or swallow something eagerly
pillageloot expecially during war
  REFERENCES 1. Michael Edwardes, 
British India 1772-1947
, Rupa & Co, 1993.
 2. Dharma Kumar, 
Land and Caste in South India
, Cambridge University Press, 1965. 
 3. Dharma Kumar and Tapan Raychaudhuri (eds), 
The Cambridge Economic History of 
India
, Cambridge University Press, 2008.
 4. L.S.S. O™Malley, 
Modern India and the West
, OUP, 1968.
 5. Sarada Raju, 
The Agrarian Structure of the Madras Presidency: Impact of British 
Administration
, University of Madras.
 6. William Digby, 
Prosperous British India
, New Delhi: Sagar Publications, 1969.
 7. Geoghegan, 
Report on Coolie Emigration from India
, 1874. 
 8. Madhav Gadgil and Ramachandra Guha, 
This Fissured Land
, OUP, 1992.
 9. Naoroji, 
Poverty and Un-British Rule in India
, Publication Division, Govt. of India.
TIME LINERegulating Act
1773Pitt India Act
1784Permanent Settlement
1793Ryotwari System
1822Sati Abolition Act
1829First Railway Line (India)
1853Madras Famine
1876-1878
126Early Resistance to  British Rule18Lesson
Learning ObjectivesTo acquaint oneself with
The early resistance of Mysore Sultans to the British East India Company rule
The establishment of palayakkarar system in south India and the revolt of 
southern palayakkarars
The revolt of Theeran Chinnamalai in the Kongu region and other displaced 

rulers in Vellore.
The peasant and tribal uprisings against Company, Mahajan and Zamindars
The great rebellion of 1857, resulting in the final takeover of the Company by 

the Crown
Introduction˜e conquest of territories and the 

expansionist policy of the British East 
India Company led to a series of rebellions 
of deposed˚kings, or their descendants, 
uprooted 
zamindars
,˚and 
palayakarars
. Historians describe this as primary 
resistance. Independent of such revolts 
were the uprisings of the dispossessed 
peasants and tribals. ˜e rapid changes 

introduced by the British in the agrarian 
relations, land revenue system, and judicial 
administration, elaborated in the previous 
lesson, greatly disrupted the agrarian 
economy, resulting in widespread misery 

among various sections of the society. 
˜erefore, when the aggrieved erstwhile 
ruling class raised a standard of revolt, the 
support of the mass of peasants and artisans 
was not lacking. In this lesson we discuss 
the happenings of that time in south India 
as well as the great rebellion of 1857. 
18.1  
Mysore Sultans and their Resistance Rise of Haider AliMysore was a small feudatory kingdom 
under the Vijayanagar Empire. After 
Vijayanagar fell in 1565, the ruling dynasty 
of Wodeyars asserted their independence 
and the Raja Wodeyar ascended the throne 
in 1578. The capital moved from Mysore 

to Srirangapatnam in 1610. Wodeyar 
dynasty continued to reign until 1760, 
when the real power changed hands to 

Haider Ali who was appointed Dalwai or 
prime minister.

127Haider Ali
Haider™s father Fateh Muhammad was the 
Faujdar (garrison commander) of Kolar. 
After his death Haider™s soldierly qualities 
helped him to rise through the military 
ranks. By 1755 he had secured a powerful 
position, commanding 100 horsemen and 

2000 infantry men. Haider suppressed an 
army mutiny in Mysore and restored the 
places of the Mysore kingdom occupied 

by Marathas. He received the title of 
ﬁFateh Haider Bahadurﬂ or ﬁthe brave and 
victorious Lionﬂ. In 1760 Haider allied 
himself with the French at Pondicherry 
against the English, but his position 

at home was endangered by the plot 
engineered by the Marathas. As Haider 
successfully handled the situation and 
thereafter he became not only Dalawai 
but the de facto ruler of Mysore. In 

1770 the Mysore king Nanjaraja was 
poisoned to death and Haider™s hand was 
suspected. Thereafter Wodeyar kings 

functioned only as nominal rulers. The 
real royal˚authority vested in Haider.
Haider Ali and the BritishAfter obtaining Diwani right (right to 
collect taxes on behalf of the Mughal 
emperor from Bengal, Bihar and Orissa), 
the Company had to safeguard its 
territories. As the Company was not 
strong enough, it avoided interfering in 
the internal affairs of the Indian states. 
Warren Hastings maintained buffer 
states to live within a ﬁRing Fenceﬂ.  The 

Company was, however, drawn towards 
the affairs of the Carnatic, due to the 
successive struggles for its Nawabship.  

The English traders saw in this a great 
opportunity to directly interfere in Indian 
politics. However, there were threats from 
two strong powers represented by Haider 
Ali and the Nizam of Hyderabad. 
First Mysore War (1767-69)In the third Carnatic War Colonel Forde 

while conducting the forces from Bengal 
captured Masulipatnam in 1759. This 
led to a treaty with Salabad Jung, who 
ceded the Northern Sarkars to the British 
(districts of Ganjam, Vizagapatnam, 

Godavari, Krishna and Guntur). English 
acquisition of the Northern Sarkars 
was legalized by the Mughal emperor in 

1765 by the treaty of Allahabad. In 1766, 
trouble arose when the English occupied 
those districts. Yet a treaty was signed 
with Nizam Ali who acquiesced in the 
session. In return the English promised 

to help out in case of any danger from 
the enemies. This promise meant English 
help to the Nizam against Haider Ali. 
Here lay the genesis of the later Subsidiary 
System. Despite the treaty, Nizam came 

to an understanding with Haider in 1767 
and the British therefore declared a war 
against Haider. This is called First Anglo-

Mysore War or First Mysore War.
An English army from Bombay 
captured Mangalore and other 
surrounding places on the West Coast. 
But Haider succeeded in recovering both. 

The English made an attempt to capture 
Bangalore but to no avail. In 1768 Haider 
pounced on Baramahal (Salem district) 
and marched on Karur and then Erode and 

128reached Porto Novo and won a decisive 
victory over Haider. Haider narrowly 
escaped capture. Colonel Braithwaite was 
thoroughly defeated near Kumbakonam 
by Haider™s son Tipu and taken prisoner. In 
order to divert the attention of the Mysore 

Sultan, an expedition was undertaken by 
General Mathews to capture Mangalore. 
Expectedly Tipu abandoned Karnataka 

and moved to West Coast. 
˜e death of Haider due to cancer in 
1782, the signing of Treaty of Paris (1783) at 
the end of American War of Independence, 
and the protracted siege of Mangalore 

enabled the English to be aggressive against 
Tipu. Karur and Dindigul were captured 
by Colonel Lang, Colonel Fullerton seized 
Palghat and Coimbatore but this advance 
on Srirangapatnam was pre-empted by 

Tipu with his proposal for peace. ˜e Treaty 
of Mangalore was signed in March 1784, 
according to which both parties agreed 

to give up their conquests and release the 
prisoners. 
Third Mysore War (1790-92)In the meantime Lord Cornwallis had 
become governor general. Cornwallis 
wanted to deal with Tipu in a revengeful 
manner. The two great southern powers, 
the Nizam of Hyderabad and the Maratha 
confederacy, supported the British as its 

allies. The Nizam of Hyderabad supplied 
resources and even troops for the British. 
The Marathas, who had signed the Treaty 

of Salbai with the English after the First 
Anglo-Maratha war in 1782, also joined 
the British. The British position was thus 
greatly strengthened.
Tipu sent an embassy to 
Constantinople and another in 1787 to 

Paris. These dipl
omatic efforts of Tipu 
were intended to strengthen him against 
the English. The French Monarch Louis 
XVI was hospitable, but could give only 

vague promises of support to the Sultan.
took over both by defeating Captain Nixon. 

Meanwhile, his general Fazalullah Khan 
marched on Madurai and Tirunelveli. 
Haider advanced to Thanjavur and from 

there to Cuddalore. Though Haider did not 
want stop his offensive against the English, 
the threat of Maratha invasion forced him 
to negotiate peace with the English. The 
terms of Treaty of Madras were as follows: 

the conquered territories to be restored 
to each, excepting Karur which was to be 
retained by Haider. Mutual assistance was 

to be rendered in wars of defence. This 
meant the English were under obligation 
to help Haider against the Marathas. But 
when assistance from English was not 
forthcoming, Haider turned against the 

English.
Haider and the Second  Mysore War (1780)After the American War of Independence, 

France had signed a treaty of friendship 
with America
 (1778) and so Britain 
declared war against France. In a similar 

context of Spain reaching an agreement 
with America, and thereby being dragged 

into the war against England (1779) 
England remained isolated. In India 
the coming together of the Nizam and 

the Marathas, supported by the French 
aggravated the situation further. Haider 
Ali wanted to turn England™s difficulty to 

its advantage and marched on Karnataka. 
Colonel Baillie, who was to join 
the force led by Hector Munro, was badly 
wounded in a sudden attack by Haider. 
This forced Munro to move Madras. 
Haider captured Arcot (1780). Now on 
request from Madras government Sir 

Eyre Coote, the victor of the Battle of 
Wandawashi, was sent from Calcutta to 
besiege Madras by sea. Having scored a 

victory against Haider, Coote proceeded 
to Pondicherry. Haider in the meantime 
overran the kingdom of Thanjavur. Coote 

129According to the treaty of 
Sri
rangapatnam, the Tipu was to give up 
half of his dominions, pay three crores 
of rupees as indemnity, and pledge two 
of his sons as hostages. The allies were 
given equal shares of the indemnity and 

of the ceded territories. The English got 
Malabar, Dindigul and Barmahal. Tipu 
lost Coorg (Kudagu), whose raja became 

a feudatory to the Company. Tipu™s power 
was greatly reduced. And after their stay 
at Madras as hostages the boys returned 
to Srirangapatnam on 29 May 1794 when 
their father had paid all the dues to the 

English. Tipu could hardly forget his 
humiliation and the heavy territorial and 
monetary losses suffered.
The Mysore king Chamaraj 
IX died in 1796. Tipu resolved not to 

observe the formality of appointing a 

king. Synchronizing with this resolve 
came the announcement of the French 
colonial Governor of Mauritius General 
Malartic that, after obtaining French help, 
he would declare war on the English. In 

July 1798 Tipu™s correspondence with the 
French Directory and later with Napoleon 
and his evasiveness in his correspondence 
with Wellesley led to his declaration of 
war against Tipu. 
Fourth Mysore War (1799)Tipu made all out efforts to strengthen his 

military and financial resources. In 1796 
Tipu sent emissaries 
to Paris again. In 1797 
he received a French emissary to confirm 

French support from Mauritius. A Jacobin 
club was started in Srirangapatinam and 

the flag of the French Republic was hoisted 
to mark the cordiality established between 
the French and the Sultan of Mysore.
Irked by Tipu™s 
alliance with the 
French Wellesley, now the new Governor 

General, insisted on a standing army at 
Mysore under the Subsidiary System. Tipu 
turned down Wellesley™s proposal and the 
Tipu™s attack on Travancore which 
was an ally of the British and his capture of 

Cranganore was treated as a declaration of 
war on the Company government. Hence 
the third Anglo-Mysore War broke out. ˚
Tipu Sultan
Srirangapatnam Fort
Colonel Hartley defeated Tipu™s 
general Husain Ali at Calicut. In response 
Tipu  captured Tiruvannamalai. His effort 
to get the support of French Pondicherry 
Governor did not materialise. Cornwallis 
himself marched from Vellore and 

reached Bangalore. On his way he 
encountered Tipu and defeated him near 
Srirangapatnam. But lack of provisions 

compelled Cornwallis to retreat. At this 
juncture the Marathas helped the British 
in supplying the required provisions. The 
reinforced army of the English marched 
on Srirangapatnam again and besieged 

it. Unable to withstand the onslaught of 
the British forces Tipu offered peace and 
accepted the terms imposed by Cornwallis. 

130judicial powers and dispensed justice over 
civil and criminal cases.
˜e origin of the Palayakkarar (poligari) 
system dates back to the 1530s. It is 
believed that this system was practiced 

earlier in Kakatiya kingdom of Warangal. 

˜e literal meaning of Palayakkarar is the 

holder of a camp as well as the holder of 

an estate on military tenure. Prior to the 

enforcement of this system Servaikarars 

and Talayaris collected fees for police 

work. A˛er the creation of palayams, the 

Servaikarars turned Palayakkarars and 

subordinated˚Talayaris˚to their authority.
Based on the topographical 
distribution they are classified as western 
palayams and eastern palayams. The 
palayams held by Maravar chieftains were 
mostly in the western parts of Tirunelveli. 
The settlement of Telugu migrants in 
the black soil tracts, lying in the eastern 

part of Tirunelveli, left those parts under 
Nayak Palayakkarars.
Revolt of Palyakkarars˜e Nawab of Arcot, who had borrowed 
heavily by pledging the villages in several 
parts of Tamilnadu, entrusted the task 
of collecting land revenue arrears to the 
Company administration. Yusuf Khan, 
remembered as Khan Sahib, had been 
employed as commander of the Company™s 
Indian troops. He was entrusted not only 
with the command of the forces, but also with 
the collection of revenue. At the request of 
the Nawab, a force of 500 Europeans and 200 
sepoys was (1755), ordered to proceed into 

the ﬁcountries of Madurai and Tirunelveliﬂ to 
assist him. ˜e encroachment of East Indian 
Company administration into palayakkarar™s 
authority aroused sti˝ resistance.
Mafuzkhan (
Arcot Nawab™s elder 
brother) was appointed by the Nawab as 

his representative in those territories. 
British declared the fourth Anglo-Mysore 
war in 1799. General David Baird stormed 
Srirangapatnam. Tipu™s offer of peace was 
rejected and in the eventual battle Tipu 
was wounded and soon after shot dead by 
a European Soldier.
The elimination of Tipu and the 
restoration of the old Wodeyar dynasty 

to the Mysore kingdom marked the real 
beginning of Company rule in south India. 

The sons of the slain Tipu were interned 
first at Vellore, and later, after the Vellore 
Revolt of 1806, shifted to Calcutta. Thus 
ended the valiant fight of Mysore Sultans 
against the British 
18.2  
Early Resistance 
of Southern Palayakkarars against the BritishOrigin of Palayams and PalayakkararsAfter the decline of Vijayanagara Empire, 
Nagama Nayak who arrived as a viceroy 
to Madurai and his son Viswanatha Nayak 
asserted themselves as independent rulers 
of Madurai and Tirunelveli. Under the able 
guidance of prime minister Ariyanayaga 

Mudaliyar, all the little kingdoms of the 
former Pandian Empire were classified and 
converted into 72 palayams. Viswanatha 

Nayak constructed a formidable fort 
around Madurai city, which consisted of 
seventy two bastions. Each of them was 
placed under a chief.
A Palayakkarar was bound to pay 
a fixed annual tribute or supply troops to 

the king and to keep order and peace over 
a particular area. In order to enable him to 
perform these duties and attend to other 
services, a certain number of villages 

were granted for revenue collection. In 
addition he was presented with several 
titles and privileges. Palayakkarars had 

131From 1756 to 1763, aided frequently 
by Travancore, the palyakkarars of 
Tirunelveli led by Puli Thevar were in 
a constant state of rebellion against the 
authority of the Nawab. Yusuf Khan who 
had been sent by the Company would 

not venture to attack Puli Thevar unless 
the big guns and ammunition from 
Tiruchirappalli arrived. As the English 

were involved in a war with the French, 
as well as with Haider Ali and Marathas, 
big guns arrived only in September 
1760. Yusuf Khan began to batter the 
Nerkattumseval fort and this attack 

continued for about two months. On 16 
May 1761 Puli Thevar™s three major forts 
namely Nerkattumseval, Vasudevanallur 
and Panayur came under the control of 
Yusuf Khan.˚ After taking Pondicherry the 

English commanded respect, as they had 
eliminated the French from the picture. 
Mafuskhan along with Colonel Heron 
proceeded towards Tirunelveli. They easily 
took Madurai. An expedition was sent to 
reduce Kattabomman, the palayakkarar of 

Panchalamkurichi but had to be recalled. 
While returning Colonel Heron was urged 
to storm the fort of Nel-Kattum-Seval.

Its palayakkarar Puli Thevar wielded 
enormous influence over the western 
palayakkarars. For want of cannon and of 
supplies and pay to soldiers, the attack of 
Colonel Heron had to be abandoned and 

the force retired to Madurai. 
Three Pathan officers, Nawab 
Chanda Sahib™s agents, named 
Mianah, Mudimiah and Nabikhan 
Kattak, commanded the Madurai and 

Tirunelveli regions. They supported 
Tamil˚palayakkarars˚against Arcot 
Nawab Mohamed Ali. Puli Thevar 

had established close relationships 
with them. The palayakkarars of 
Uthumalai, Surandai, Thalaivankottai, 
Naduvakurichi, Singampatti, Urkad, 
Seithur, Kollamkondan and Wadakarai 

joined Puli Thevar™s confederacy. With 
the promise of restoring Kalakkadu, Puli 
Thevar had already won over the ruler of 
Tranvancore to his confederacy.
Nawab, on his side, sent an additional 
contingent of sepoys to Mahfuzkhan and the 

reinforced army proceeded to Tirunelveli. 
Besides the 1000 sepoys of the Company, 

Mahfuzkhan received 600 more sent by 
the Nawab. He also had the support of 
cavalry and foot soldiers from the Carnatic. 
Before˚
Mafuskhan˚could station his 
troops near Kalakadu, 2000 soldiers from 
Travancore joined the forces of Puli ˜evar. 
In the battle of Kalakadu, Mahfuzkhan's 
troops were trounced.
The organized resistance of the 
palayakkarars under Puli Thevar gave 

an opportunity to the British to interfere 
directly in the affairs of Tirunelveli. 
Yusuf Khan was born as Maruthanayakam 
Pillai. Originally he belonged to 
Ramanathapuram district. When in 

Pondicherry he embraced Islam. He 

joined the company of sepoys under Clive 

in 1752 and participated in the siege of 

Tiruchirappalli during 1752-54. From 1756 

to 1761 he was in charge of the districts of 

Madurai and Tirunelveli as Governor under 

the Madras Government which had been 

controlling them though they belonged to 

the Nawab of Arcot. He defeated Haider 

Ali and captured Solavandan. At the time 

Lally™s siege of Madras (1758-59), he 

rendered splendid service to the English. As 

one in charge of administration of Madurai 

and Tirunelveli regions he encouraged the 

weaving industry of Madurai. He gave a 

˙xed amount for the conduct of worship 

in the temples of Madurai and retrieved 

the temple lands. Yusuf Khan rebelled 

because the English ordered him to serve 

the Nawab of Arcot.

132was killed by the Nawab™s forces, Velu 
Nachiyar escaped with her daughter and 
lived under the protection of Haider 
Ali at Virupachi near Dindigul for eight 
years. During this period she organized 
an army and succeeded in securing an 

alliance with Gopala Nayaker and Haider 
Ali. In 1780 Rani Velu Nachiyar fought 
the British with military assistance from 

Gopala Nayaker and Haider Ali and won 
the battle. 
Velu Nachiyar employed her intelligence 
gathering agents to discover where the 
British stored their ammunition. One of 

her followers Kuyili, doused herself in 

oil, set herself alight, and walked into the 

storehouse. She also employed another 

agent, her adopted daughter Udaiyaal, 

to detonate a British arsenal, blowing 

herself up along with the barracks. Velu 

Nachiyar formed a woman™s army.
˚The Nawab of Arcot placed many 
obstacles to the advancement of the 
Rani™s troops.˚ However she overcame 
all the hurdles and entered Sivagangai. 
The Nawab of Arcot was defeated and 
taken captive. Velu Nachiyar recaptured 
Sivagangai and was again crowned queen 

with the help of Marudu brothers.
A˛er ascending the throne Velu 
Nachiar appointed Chinna Marudu as her 

adviser and Periya Marudu as commander. In 
1783 the English forces invaded Sivaganagai 
again. ˜is time the Marudu Pandiyan 
saved the place by some diplomatic moves. 
In 1790, Vellachi Nachiyar, daughter of Velu 

Nachiyar who was married to Vengan Periya 
Udaya ˜evar who became the king of 
Sivagangai state due to compromise formula 
of the Englishmen, died under mysterious 
circumstances. Velu Nachiyar became sick 

and died in three years later in1796.
Consequently the unity of palyakkarars 

began to break up as French support was 
not forthcoming. Travancore, Seithur, 
Uthumalai and Surandai switched their 
loyalty. Yusuf Khan, who was negotiating 
with the palayakkarars without informing 

the Company administration, was charged 
with treachery and hanged in 1764.
Puli Thevar, who had taken 
asylum elsewhere after the forts were 
taken over by Yusuf Khan, returned and 

began to organize against the British. 
Cap
tain Campbell who was sent this time 
by the British, laid siege and captured 
Nerkattumseval in 1767. Nothing is 
definitely known about the last days of 
Puli Thevar.
Velu NachiyarVelu Nachiyar˚
The Sethupathys ruled the area that 

covered Ramanathapuram, Sivagangai, 
Virudhunagar, and Pudukkottai districts 
of the present day. Velu Nachiyar˚was the 
daughter of Chellamuthu Sethupathy, the 
raja of Ramanathapuram. She married 

Muthu Vadugar Periyaudayar, the Raja 
of Sivagangai, and had a daughter named 
Vellachi Nachiar. When her husband 

133taxes. Collector Jackson wanted to send 
an expedition to punish Veera Pandiyan 
but the Madras administration did 
not agree. The Company had already 
withdrawn its forces from Tirunelveli 
to be employed in the war against Tipu 

Sultan of Mysore, and did not desire to risk 
a conflict in the far south at this juncture. 
It directed the collector to summon the 

Palayakkarar at Ramanathapuram and 
hold a discussion. Accordingly, on the 
18˚August 1798 Jackson despatched an 
order directing Veera Pandiyan to meet 
him at Ramanathapuram within two 

weeks. After sending the summons, the 
collector started on a tour of Tirunelveli. 
When Jackson halted at Chokkampatti, 
Sivagiri, Sattur and Srivilliputhur to 
receive tribute from the Palayakkarars, 

Veera Pandiyan sought an interview but 
was told that he could meet the collector 
only at Ramanathapuram.
Despite this humiliation, 
Kattabomman followed the Englishman 

for twenty three days over 400 miles 
through the latter™s route and reached 
Ramanathapuram on 19
 September. An 
interview was granted the same day and 
the collector expressed his satisfaction that 
the Palayakkarar
˚had behaved properly 
and thereby ﬁsaved himself from ruinﬂ. 

Upon a verification of accounts Jackson 

was convinced that Kattabomman had 
cleared most of the arrears, leaving only 
1080 pagodas as balance to be settled. 
Veera Pandiya KattabommanVeera Pandiya Kattabomman
While Velu Nachiyar was fighting the 

British and engaging their complete 
attention on Ramanathapruam and 
Sivagangai, Veera Pandiya Kattabomman™s 
resistance against the British was on 
progress. Kattabomma Nayak was 

the playakkarar of Panchalamkurichi. 
Kattabomman Nayak was a family title. 
The chieftain of the Colonel Heron™s 

time was Jagaveera Kattabomman 
Nayak, the grandfather of Veera Pandiya  
Kattabomman.  This Veera Pandiya 
Kattabomman, born in 1761, became the 
palayakkarar on the death of his father, 

Jagaveera Pandiya  Kattabomman. The 
collection of tribute continued to be a 
problem as there was a constant tussle 
between the Company and the southern 
palayakkarars. In September 1798 as the 

tribute from Panchalamkuriuchi fell into 
arrears, Collector Jackson wrote to Veera 
Pandiyan in his characteristic arrogance. 
The country experienced a severe 
drought, in consequence of which the 

palayakkarars˚found it difficult to collect 
Pagoda was the dominant currency in use 
at the time of arrival of European traders. 
It was a gold coin of Vijayanagar descent. 

It was called varagan in Tamil. During 

the reign of Tipu Sultan, one pagoda was 

the equivalent of three and half rupees in 

Mysore. ﬁShaking the pagoda treeﬂ was a 

phrase used in England to describe the 

opportunities for making quick fortunes 

in India.

134Thus in a bold attempt to strengthen 
his position an armed column consisting 
of the followers of Veera Pandiyan, the son 
of the Palayakkarar
˚of Sivagiri and other 
allied chiefs, led by Dalawai Kumaraswami 
Nayak, moved towards the west. 
As the 

Palayakkarar of Sivagiri was a tributary 
to the Company, the Madras Governor™s 
Council considered this as a challenge to 

its own authority and ordered the march 
of the army.
In May 1799 Lord Wellesley issued 
orders from for the advance of forces from 
Trichirapalli, Thanjavur and Madurai to 
Tirunelveli. The Travancore troops joined 
the British. Major Bannerman, armed with 

extensive powers, effectively commanded 
the expedition. 
On 1 June 1799 Kattabomman, 
attended by 500 men, proceeded to 

Sivaganga. At Palayanur Kattabomman 
held deliberations with Marudu. 
Subsequently, joined by 500 armed men 
of Sivaganga, Kattabomman returned to 

Panjalamkurichi.
The Palayakkarars of Nagalapuram, 
Mannarkottai, Powalli, Kolarpatti 
and Chennulgudi had already formed 
themselves into a combination due to the 

efforts of Marudu brothers. They asserted 
their rights to collect taxes from certain 
villages in the Company™s territory. 
Kattabomman proceeded to join this 
league to take up its leadership by virtue 

of the influence that he wielded and the 
resources he possessed. Determined to 
strengthen this league, he persuaded the 

chieftains of Satur, Yezhayirampannai, 
Kadalgudi and Kulathoor to join it.
On 1 September 1799 Major 
Bannerman served an ultimatum directing 
Kattabomman to see him at Palayamkottai. 
As Kattabomman dodged Bannerman 
decided on military action. The Company 

army reached Panchalamkurichi on 
5˚September. 
Denied of courtesy, the palayakkarar
 and 
his minister Sivasubram
ania Pillai had 
to stand before the arrogant collector. 
Finally he directed them to stay inside 
the Ramanathapuram fort. Now a few 
sepoys appeared, apparently to arrest 

Kattabomman. But they escaped. At the 
gate of the fort a clash occurred, in which 
some including Lieutenant Clarke were 
killed. Siva subramania Pilai was taken 
prisoner but Kattabomman made his 

escape. 
A˛er his return to Panchalamkurichi, 
Kattabomman wrote to the Madras Council 

blaming the attitude of Jackson for the 

scuˆe. In the meantime Governor Edward 
Clive had issued a proclamation, inviting 
the palayakkarar
 to submit to the authority 
of the Company. In the event of surrender 
he assured a fair investigation into the 

Ramanathapuram incident
. If he refused, 
he threatened Kattabomman with dire 
consequences. In response Kattabomman 

appeared before the committee which 
acquitted him of the charges of rebellion 
and condemned the conduct of the collector. 
S.R. Lushington was appointed collector in 
the place of Jackson, who was eventually 

dismissed from service.
However, Kattabomman remained 
irreconciled. At this time Marudu 

Pandiyan of Sivaganga along with Gopala 

Nayak of Dindigul and Yadul Nayak of 
Anamalai, was engaged in organising a 
Confederacy against the British. In view 
of the identity of interests Kattabomman 
and Marudu Pandiyan came closer. 
Kattabomman also established 
contact with the Sivagiri palayakkarar. 
While Panchalamkurichi was situated in 
an open plain and appeared vulnerable, 

the strategic location of the fort of Sivagiri 
at the foot of the Western Ghats and the 
formidable barriers around it rendered it 
eminently suited both for offensive and 
defensive operations.

135Marudu Brothers and the South Indian Rebellion of 1801 Marudu Brothers
By the treaty of 1772 the Arcot Nawab 
had authorized the Company to collect 
the Stalam Kaval and Desakaval. This 
affected the Kaval chiefs in both the 
Palayakkarar and non-palaykkarar 
territories. The aggrieved kavalkarars and 

their chiefs had joined the palayakkarars 
in their fight against the Nawab and the 
Company. In Sivagangai, Vella Marudu 

and Chinna Marudu, who had taken over 
the administration from Periya Udaya 
Tevar, who died in battle against the 
Nawab™s forces, expelled the forces of the 
Nawab and proclaimed Vellachi, daughter 

of Periya Udaya Tevar and Velu Nachiyar, 
as the queen of Sivagangai. The Marudus 
assumed the charge of the ministers. The 
temple of Kalayarkoil in the heart of the 
then Sivagangai forest became the rallying 

point of the rebels. When Umathurai 
reached Kamudhi after the execution of 
his brother Veera Pandiya  Kattabomman, 

Chinna Marudu took him to Siruvayal, his 
capital.  
Now, Nawab Mohammad Ali 
released Muthuramalinga Thevar from 

jail and enthroned him as the Setupati 
of Ramanathapuram. But the rebels 
proclaimed Muthu Karuppa Thevar as 
their ruler.  They occupied the southern 

and northern regions of the kingdom. The 
soldiers made their entry into Madurai 
Kattabomman™s fort, 500 feet long 
and 300 feet broad, was constructed 
entirely of mud. The Company forces 

cut off the communications of the fort. 
Kattabomman™s forces fought gallantly 
and successive attacks were repulsed. 

Colonel Welsh recorded in his memoirs 
the gallantry of Kattabomman's soldiers. 
The English ordered for the arrival of more 
troops. On 16˚September reinforcements 
arrived from Palayamkottai. As the broken 

walls appeared vulnerable, the garrison 
evacuated and reached Kadalgudi. In 
a clash at Kalarpatti, Kattabomman™s 
minister Sivasubramonia Pillai was taken 
prisoner. The British forces followed 

up their victory with the reduction of 
Nagalapuram and other strongholds 
of the defiant chiefs to submission. On 

the appearance of the army the western 
Palayakkarars too surrendered.
Vijaya Ragunatha Tondaiman, Raja 
of Pudukottai, captured Kattabomman 
from the jungles of Kalapore and handed 
him over to the enemy. Upon the fall of 
the Palayakkarar into the hands of the 

enemy, his followers fled to Sivaganga 
and from there to the hills of Dindigul for 
taking service with Marudu Pandiyan and 
Gopala Nayak.
Bannerman brought the prisoners 
to an assembly of the Palayakkarars and 
a˛er a mockery of trial sentenced them 

to death. On 16˚October Veera Pandiya 
Kattabomman was tried before an assembly 
of Palayakkarars at Kayatar. Unmindful of 
impending death Kattabomman admitted all 
the charges levelled against him. He declared 

that he did send his armed men against 
Sivagiri and that he did ˙ght the British 
troops in the battle at Panchalamkurichi. On 
17 October Kattabomman was hanged to 
death at a conspicuous spot near the old fort 

of Kayatar. Kattabomman™s heroic exploits 
were the subject of many folk ballads which 
kept his memory alive among the people.

136the able commanders of the British army 
won the day. Following Umathurai™s arrest 
Marudu brothers were captured from 
the Singampunary hills, and Shevathiah 
from Batlagundu and Doraiswamy, the 
son of Vellai Marudu from a village 

near Madurai. Chinna Marudu and his 
brother Vellai Marudu were executed at 
the fort of Tiruppatthur on 24 October 

1801. Umathurai and Shevathiah, with 
several of their followers, were taken to 
Panchalamkurichi and beheaded on 16 
November 1801. Seventy three rebels were 
banished to Penang in Malaya in April 

1802. 
Theeran ChinnamalaiTheeran Chinnamalai
The Kongu country comprising Salem, 

Coimbatore, Karur and Dindigul formed 
part of the Nayak kingdom of Madurai 
but had been annexed by the Wodayars 
of Mysore. After the fall of the Wodayars, 
these territories together with Mysore 

were controlled by the Mysore Sultans. As 
a result of the Third and Fourth Mysore 
wars the entire Kongu region passed into 

the hands of the English.
Theeran Chinnamalai was a 
palayakkarar of Kongu country who fought 
the British East India Company. He was 
too. In July Umathurai led his followers 
to Palayanad in Madurai and captured 
it. In 1801 both the Sivagangai and 
Ramanathapuram forces joined together 
under the command of Shevatha Thambi, 
the son of Chinna Marudu, and marched 
along the coast towards Thanjavur. 

Thereupon the distressed peasants in 
Thanjavur also joined the force of Shevatha 
Thambi. Captain William Blackburne, the 

resident of Thanjaur collected a force and 
defeated Shevatha Thambi near Mangudi.  
Serfoji, the raja of Thanjavur stood firmly 
by the British. Yet the fighters could elude 
the pursuit of the British troops by rapid 

movements, while laying the entire region 
waste. 
18.3  
South Indian Rebellion 1801The victory over Tipu and Kattabomman 
had released British forces from several 
fronts to target the fighting forces in 
Ramanathapuram and Sivagangai. 
Thondaiman of Pudukottai had already 
joined the side of the Company. The 

Company had also succeeded in 
winning the support of the descendent 
of the former ruler of Sivagangai named 

Padmattur Woya Thevar. Woya Thevar 
was recognised by the Company as the 
legitimate ruler of Sivagangai. This 
divisive strategy split the royalist group, 
eventually demoralizing the fighting 

forces against the British. 
In May 1801 a strong detachment 
under the command of P.A. Agnew 
commenced its operations. Marching 
through Manamadurai and Partibanur 

the Company forces occupied the rebel 
strongholds of Paramakudi. In the clashes 
that followed both sides suffered heavy 

losses. But the fighters™ stubborn resistance 
and the Marudu brothers™ heroic battles 
made the task of the British formidable. In 
the end the superior military strength and 

137English. Thus the Vellore Fort became 
the meeting ground of the rebel forces of 
south India. The sepoys and the migrants 
to Vellore held frequent deliberations, 
attended by the representatives of the 
sons of Tipu.
Immediate CauseIn the meantime, the English enforced 

certain innovations in the administration 
of the sepoy establishments. They 
prohibited all markings on the forehead 
which were intended to denote caste 
and religious, and directed the sepoys 

to cut their moustaches to a set pattern. 
Added to these, Adjutant General Agnew 
designed and introduced under his direct 

supervision a new model turban for the 
sepoys. 
The most obnoxious innovation 
in the new turban, from the Indian point 
of view, was the leather cockade. The 

cockade was made of animal skin. Pig 
skin was anathema to Muslims, while 
upper caste Hindus shunned anything to 
do with the cow™s hide. To make matters 
worse the front part of the uniform had 

been converted into a cross. 
The order regarding whiskers, 
caste marks and earrings, which infringed 

the religious customs of both Hindu and 
Muslim soldiers, was justified on the 
grounds that, although they had not been 
prohibited previously by any formal order, 
it had never been the practice in any well-

regulated corps for the men to appear with 
them on parade.
The first incident occurred in 
May 1806. The men in the 2nd battalion 
of the 4th regiment at Vellore refused to 

wear the new turban. When the matter 
was reported to the Governor by Col. 
Fancourt, commandant of the garrison, 

he ordered a band of the 19th Dragoons 
(Cavalry) to escort the rebels, against 
whom charges had been framed, to the 
trained by the French and Tipu. In his bid 
to launch an attack on the Company™s fort 
in Coimbatore (1800), Chinnamalai tried 

taking the help of the Marudu brothers 
from Sivagangai. He also forged alliances 
with Gopal Nayak of Virupatchi; Appachi 
Gounder of Paramathi Velur; Joni Jon 
Kahan of Attur Salem; Kumaral Vellai of 

Perundurai and Varanavasi of Erode in 
fighting the Company.
Chinnamalai™s plans did not 
succeed as the 
Company stopped the 
reinforcements from the Marudu brothers. 
Also, Chinnamalai changed his plan and 
attacked the fort a day earlier. This led to 
the Company army executing 49 people. 

However, Chinnamalai escaped. Between 
1800 and July 31, 1805 when he was 
hanged, Chinnamalai continued to fight 
against the Company. Three of his battles 
are important: the 1801 battle on Cauvery 

banks, the 1802 battle in Odanilai and the 
1804 battle in Arachalur. The last and the 
final one was in 1805. During the final 

battle, Chinnamalai was betrayed by his 
cook Chinnamalai and was hanged in 
Sivagiri fort.
Vellore Revolt (1806)Vellore Revolt 1806 was the culmination 

of the attempts of the descendents of the 
dethroned kings and chieftains in south 
India to throw of the yoke of the British 
rule. After the suppression of revolt of 
Marudu brothers, they made Vellore the 

centre of their activity. The organizers of 
an Anti-British Confederacy continued 
their secret moves, as a result of which 

no fewer than 3,000 loyalists of Mysore 
sultans had settled either in the town of 
Vellore or in its vicinity. The garrison of 
Vellore itself consisted of many aggrieved 
persons,˚who had been reduced to dire 

straits as a sequel to loss of positions or 
whose properties had been confiscated 
or whose relatives were slain by the 

138Outbreak of RevoltVellore Fort
At 2:00 a.m. on 10 July, the sentry at the 
main guard informed Corporal Piercy 
saying that a shot or two had been fired 
somewhere near the English barracks. 
Before Piercy could respond, the sepoys 
made a near simultaneous attack on the 

British guards, the British barracks and 
the officers™ quarters in the Fort. In the 
European quarters the shutters were kept 

open, as they were the only means of 
ventilation from the summer heat. The 
rebels could easily fire the gun ‚through 
the barred windows on the Europeans, 
lying unprotected in their beds.™ Fire was 

set to the European quarters. Detachments 
were posted to watch the dwellings of the 
European officers, ready to shoot anyone 
who came out.  A part of the 1
st regiment 
took possession of the magazines (place 

where gun powder and ball cartridges 
stored). A select band of 1
st Regiment 
was making their rounds to massacre the 
European officers in their quarters.   
˜irteen oˇcers were killed, in 
addition to several European conductors of 
ordnance. In the barracks, 82 privates died, 

and 91 were wounded. 
Major Armstrong of the 16
th native 
infantry was passing outside the Fort 
when he heard the firing. He advanced 
to the glacis and asked what the firing 
meant. He was answered by a volley from 
the ramparts, killing him instantly. Major 

Coates, an officer of the English regiment 
Presidency for a trial. The 2nd battalion 

of the 4th regiment was replaced by the 
2nd battalion of the 23rd regiment of 
Wallajahbad. The Court Martial tried 21 

privates (a soldier of lower military rank)Œ
10 Muslims and 11 HindusŒ, for defiance. 
In pursuance of the Court Martial order 
two soldiers (a Muslim and a Hindu) were 
sentenced to receive 900 lashes each and 

to be discharged from service. 
Despite signals of protest the 
Government decided to go ahead with the 

change, dismissing the grievance of Indian 
soldiers. Governor William Bentinck also 
believed that the ‚disinclination to wear 
the turban was becoming more feeble.™
Though it was initially claimed 
that the officers on duty observed 

nothing unusual during the  night of July 
9, it was later known that the English 
officer on duty did not go on his rounds 
and asked one of the Indian officers to 

do the duty and Jameder Sheik Kasim, 
later one of the principal accused, had 
done it. The leaders of the regiment who 

were scheduled to have a field day on the 
morning of 10 July, used it as a pretext to 
sleep in the Fort on the night of 9 July. 
The Muslim native adjutant contrived to 
post as many of his followers as possible 

as guards within the Fort. 
Jamal-ud-din, one of the twelve 
princes of Tipu family, who was suspected 
to have played a key role in the revolt, 
kept telling them in secret parleys that 

the prince only required them to keep the 
fort for eight days before which time ten 
thousand would arrive to their support. 

He disclosed to them that letters had been 
written to dispossessed palayakkarars 
seeking their assistance. He also informed 
that there were several officers in the 
service of Purniah (Tipu™s erstwhile 

minister) who were formerly in the 
Sultan™s service and would undoubtedly 
join the standard.    

139the 19
th 
dragoons under the direction of 
Lieutenant Blakiston. The troops entered 
the place, headed by a squadron of the 
cavalry under Captain Skelton. 
The Gillespie™s men were met by 
a severe crossfire. In the ensuing battle, 

Colonel Gillespie himself suffered bruises. 
The sepoys retreated. Hundreds escaped 
over the walls of the Fort, or threw down 

their arms and pleaded for mercy. Then 
the cavalry regiment assembled on the 
parade ground and resolved to pursue the 
fleeing soldiers, who were exiting towards 
the narrow passage of escape afforded by 

the sally port. A troop of dragoons and 
some native horsemen were sent round 
to intercept the fleeing soldiers. All the 
buildings in the Fort were searched, 
and mutineers found in them pitilessly 

slaughtered. Gillespie™s men wanted to 
enter the building and take revenge on the 
princes, the instigators of the plot; but Lt. 

Colonel Marriott resisted the attempt of 
the dragoons to kill Tipu™s sons.
who was on duty outside the Fort, on 
hearing of the revolt tried to enter the 
Fort. As he was unable to make it, he sent 
off an officer, Captain Stevenson of 23
rd, to Arcot with a letter addressed to Colonel 
Gillespie, who commanded the cavalry 
cantonment there. The letter reached 
Arcot, some 25 km away, at 6 a.m. Colonel 
Gillespie set out immediately, taking 

with him a squadron of the 19
th dragoons 
under Captain Young, supported by a 
strong troop of the 7
th cavalry under 
Lieutenant Woodhouse. He instructed 

Colonel Kennedy to follow him with the 
rest of the cavalry, leaving a detachment 
to protect the cantonment and to keep up 
the communication.
When Colonel Gillespie arrived at 
the Vellore Fort at 9 a.m., he thought it 

prudent to await the arrival of the guns, 
since there was continuous firing. Soon 
the cavalry under Kennedy came from 

Arcot. It was about 10 o™Clock. The gate 
was blown open with the galloper guns of 
According to J. Blakistan, an eyewitness to Gillespie's atrocity, more than 800 bodies were 
carried out of the fort. In W.J. Wilson's estimate 378 were jailed for involvement in the revolt; 
516 were considered implicated but not imprisoned. Based on depositions before the Court of 

Enquiry, the Court Martial awarded death punishment and banishment to select individuals, 

which were carried out by the commanding officer of Vellore on 23 September 1806. 
1st battalion of 1
st Regiment
Blown from a gun
 ...  
1 Havildar,   1 Naik
Shot
 ... 1 Naik,     4 sepoys
Hanged
 ... 1 Jamedar,   4 sepoys
Transported 
 ... 3 Havildars, 2 Naiks, 1 sepoy.
2nd battalion of 23
rd Regiment
Blown from a gun
 ... 2 Subedars, 2 Lascars
Hanged
 ... 2 Havildars, 1 Naik
(Source:
 W.J. Wilson, 
History of the Madras Army
, vol. III, 1888-89).

140of revenue farming system, the peasantry 
was oppressed by the revenue contractors 
and company officials who imposed 
high revenue demands and collected 
them forcibly. Initially the peasants sent 
a petition to the Company™s government 

asking for redress. But when their appeal 
for justice went unheeded, they organized 
themselves and resorted to direct action. 

They attacked the local˚
cutchery
˚(revenue 
collector™ office), looted gain stores and 

refused to pay revenue.
A peasant movement of the 1840s 
and 1850s was the Malabar rebellion 

in present day Kerala. The Mappillas 
were the descendents of Arab traders 
who had settled in this region and had 
married the Malabar women. Gradually 
the Mappillais became dependent on 

agriculture and turned into a community 
of cultivating tenants, landless labourers, 
petty traders and fishermen. When the 

British took over Malabar in 1792, they 
sought to revamp the land relations by 
creating individual ownership in land. 
The traditional system provided for an 
equal sharing of the net produce of the 

land by the 
janmi 
(holder of 
janmam 
tenure), the 
kanamdar
 (holder of 
kanam 
tenure), and the cultivator. The British 
system upset this arrangement by 
recognising the janmi as absolute owners 

of land, with right to evict tenants, which 
did not exist earlier. Apart from that, 
over-assessment, a huge burden of illegal 

cesses and a pro-landlord attitude of the 
judiciary and the police led the peasants 
to live in conditions of extreme poverty. 
A series of incidents therefore 
occurred in Malabar throughout the 

nineteenth century. Three serious 
incidents occurred in Manjeri in August 
1849, in Kulathur in August 1851 Œ both 
in south Malabar Œ and in Mattannur in 
the north in January 1852. British armed 

forces were deployed to suppress the 
Colonel Gillespie is said to have 
brought the Fort under the possession 

of the English in about 15 minutes. 
Col. Harcourt (Commanding Officer 
at Wallajahbad) was appointed to the 
temporary command of Vellore on July 
11. Harcourt assumed command of the 

garrison on 13 July, 1806 and clamped 
martial law. It was believed that the prompt 
and decisive action of Gillespie put an end 

to ‚the dangerous confederacy, and had 
the fort remained in the possession of 
the insurgents but a few days, they were 
certain of being joined by fifty thousand 
men from Mysore.™
But the obnoxious regulations 
to which the soldiers objected were 

withdrawn. The Mysore princes were 
ordered to be sent to Calcutta, as according 
the Commission of Inquiry, their 

complicity could not be established. They 
were removed from Vellore, on 20 August 
1806. The higher tribunals of the Home 

Government held the chief authorities 
of Madras, namely the Governor, the 
Commander-in-Chief, and the Deputy 
Adjutant General, responsible for the 
bungling and ordered their recall. 
Vellore had its echoes in Hyderabad, 
Wallajahbad, Bangalore, Nandydurg, 

Palayamkottai, Bellary and Sankaridurg. 
Vellore Revolt had all the forebodings 
of Great Rebellion of 1857, if the word 

cartridge is substituted by cockade and 
Bahadur Shah and Nana Sahib could be 
read for Mysore Princes.
18.4  
Peasant and Tribal RevoltsIn the late eighteenth and early nineteenth 

centuries the land tenures and revenue 
settlements of the Company™s government 
had fundamentally disrupted the Indian 
rural society and affected the peasantry in 
an unprecedented manner. In the early days 

141Santhal Hool (rebellion),  1855-56Santhal rebellion
Santhal
, also called
 Manji
, lived scattered 
in various forest regions of Bengal, Bihar, 
and Orissa. Driven from their homeland, 
they cleared the area around the Rajmahal 
Hills and called it Damin-i-koh (land of 
Santhals). They were gradually driven to 

a desperate situation as tribal lands were 
leased out to non-Santhal zamindars and 
moneylenders. To this was added the 

oppression of the local police and the 
European officials engaged in railroad 
construction. This penetration of dikus 
(outsiders) completely destroyed their 
familiar world, and forced them into 

action to take possession of their lost 
territory. 
In July 1855, when their ultimatum 
to the zamindars and the government 
went unheeded, several thousand Santhals, 

armed with bows and arrows, started an 

open insurrection ﬁagainst the unholy 

trinity of their oppressors-the zamindars, 
the mahajans and the government.ﬂ˚ At the 
battle of Maheshpur, many of the Manjis 

were dressed in red clothes. Later this 
garment became an assertion of authority. 
In the ˙rst week of the rising a party of ten 
men attacked and burnt down the village of 
Monkaparrah. ˜e rebels included a number 

of women.  
Initially their leader was Sido. After 
his arrest the revolt was led by Kanoo. At 
revolt. The repressive measures restored 

peace for about twenty years, but then 

the Mappillas rose again in 1870 and the 
events followed a similar course.
Some of the rebellions in pre-1857 
India were of the tribals whose autonomy 

and control over local resources were 
threatened by the establishment of British 
rule and the advent of its non-tribal 
agents. The tribal people, spread over a 

large part of India, rose up in hundreds 
of insurrections during the 19
th˚
century. 
These uprisings were marked by 

immense courage on their part and brutal 
suppression on the part of the rulers.
The Kol Uprising (1831-32)Kols as tribals inhabited in Chotanagpur 

and Singbhum region of Bihar and Orissa. 
The immediate cause of their uprising 
was the action of the Raja of Chotanagpur 
in leasing several villages to the non-
tribals. The Kols of Sonepur and Tamar 

took the initiative in organizing a revolt 
against the 
thikadars
 (tax collectors). The 
forms of rebellion consisted of attacks on 
the properties of the outsiders, but not 
their lives. Plunder and arson, were the 
chief modes of peasant protest. Sonepur 
pargana of Chotanagpur was raided, 
plundered and burnt down by a body of 

seven hundred insurgents on 20 December 
1831. By 26 January 1832 the Kols had 
taken complete possession of the whole 
of Chotanagpur. The revolt against the 
British had ended up in a war against the 

Company government. Buddha Bhagat, 
the leader of Kol insurrection was killed 
in a pitched battle. A sum of one thousand 

rupees was distributed among officers 
and soldiers as their reward for delivering 
Bhagat™s severed head to the authorities. 
Bhindrai Manki who inspired the revolt 
surrendered on 19 March 1832 and with 

his surrender the revolt of Kols came to a 
tragic end. 

142Mirsa™s arrest and put up a reward for his 
capture. Birsa became a martyr in Ranchi 
jail (9 June 1900). His name continues to 
inspire the tribals of the region.
18.5 Great Rebellion 1857Introduction1857 has been a subject of much debate 

among historians, both British and Indian. 
British imperialist historians dismissed it a 
mutiny, an outbreak among soldiers. Indian 
historians who explored the role of the 
people in converting a military outbreak into 

a rebellion raised two questions to which the 
imperial historians have had no answer. If it 
was only a military outbreak how to explain 

the revolt of the people even before the 
sepoys at those stations mutinied? Why was it 
necessary to punish the people with ˙ne and 
hanging for complicity in acts of rebellion? 
Col. Mallesan, the Adjutant General of the 

Bengal army in a pamphlet titled 
˜e Making 
of the Bengal Army
 remarked, ‚a military 
mutiny...speedily changed its character and 
became a national insurrection™. 
The historian Keene attributed 
the outbreak due to operation of variety 

of factors: to the grievances of princes, 
soldiers and the people, produced largely 

by the annexation and reforming zeal of 
Dalhousie. The greased cartridge affair 
merely ignited the combustible matter 
which had already accumulated. Edward 
John Thompson described the event 

‚as largely a real war of independence™.  
V.D. Savarkar, in his 
The War of Indian 
Independence
, published in 1909, argued 
that what the British had till then described 
as merely mutiny was, in fact, a war of 

independence, much like the American 
War of Independence. Despite the fact 
that the English-educated middle class 

played no role in the rebellion, nationalist 
historians championed this argument as 
the First War of Indian Independence.
the later stage of the revolt, the peasants 

also joined. Several thousand peasants 
raided on Charles Maseyk™s indigo 
factory and pillaged. This invited brutal 

counter-insurgency measures; the army 
was mobilized and Santhal villages were 
burnt one after another with vengeance. 
According to one calculation, out of 
thirty to fifty thousand rebels, fifteen to 

twenty thousand were killed before the 
insurrection was finally suppressed. 
Munda RebellionMunda Rebellion
The rebellion (ulgulan) of the Munda 
tribesmen led by Birsa Munda, occurred 
during 1899-1900. Mundas were a 
prominent tribe in the Bihar region. 
During the British rule their system of 
common land holdings was destroyed. 

Jagirdars, thikadars 
(revenue farmers) and   
moneylenders grabbed the land owned by 

them. Birsa, born in a poor share-cropper 

household in 1874, declared himself a 
divine messenger to drive away the British 
and establish Munda rule in the region. 
Under his influence the Mundas strongly 
opposed non-tribals occupying tribal 

lands. He urged the Munda cultivators not 
to pay rent to the zamindars. 
Birsa Munda led a revolt in the 
Chotta Nagpur region. The indiscriminate 
slaughter of Munda women at Sail Rakab 

did not deter the followers of Birsa. The 
British authorities issued a warrant for 

143the ˙rst half of nineteenth century and in the 
absence of any remission or relief from the 
colonial state, small and marginal farmers 
as well as cultivating tenants were subject to 
untold misery.
Alienation of Muslim Aristocracy and IntelligentsiaMuslims depended largely on public 
service. Before the Company™s rule, they 
had filled the most honourable posts in 
former governments. As commandants 
of cavalry some of them received high 
incomes. But under the Company™s 

administration, they suffered. English 
language and western education 
pushed the Muslim intelligentsia into 

insignificance. The abolition of Persian 
language in the law courts and admission 
into public service by examination 
decreased the Muslim™s chances of official 
employment.  
Religious SentimentsThe Act of 1856 providing for enrolment 

of high caste men as sepoys in the Bengal 
army stipulated that future recruits give 
up martial careers or their caste scruples. 
This apart, acts such as the abolition of 
sati, legalization of remarriage of Hindu 

widows, prohibition of infanticide were 
viewed as interference in religious beliefs. 
In 1850, to the repugnance of orthodox 

Hindus, the Lex Loci Act was passed 
permitting converts to Christianity to 
retain their patrimony (right to inherit 
property from parents or ancestors).
Further the religious sentiments of 
the sepoys Œ Hindus and Muslims Œ were 

outraged when information spread that 
the fat of cows and  pigs was used in the 

greased cartridges. The Indian sepoys 
were to bite them before loading the new 
Enfield rifle. This was viewed as a measure 

to convert people to Christianity. 
Causes of the Rebellion1857 Great Rebellion
Territorial Aggrandisement˜e annexation of Oudh and Jhansi by 

Dalhousie employing the Doctrine of Lapse 
and the humiliating treatment meted out 
to Nana Sahib, the last Peshwa™s adopted 
son produced much dissatisfaction. In 
the wake of the Inam Commission (1852) 

appointed by Bombay government to 
enquire into the cases of ﬁland held rent-free 
without authority,ﬂ more than 21,000 estates 

were con˙scated. ˜e land settlement in 
the annexed territories, particularly in 
Oudh, adversely a˝ected the interests 
of the talukdars, who turned against the 
British.  Moreover, in Oudh, thousands 

of  inhabitants who depended on the royal 
patronage and traders who were dealing 
in rich dresses and highly ornamented 
footwear and expensive jewellery lost their 
livelihood. ˜us Dalhousie through his 

expansionist policy created hardship to a 
number of people.
Oppressive Land Revenue System ˜e rate of land revenue was heavy when 
compared with former settlements. Prior to 
the British, Indian rulers collected revenue 
only when land was cultivated. ˜e British 
treated land revenue as a rent and not a 
tax. ˜is meant that revenue was extracted 

whether the land was cultivated or not, and 
at the same rate. ˜e prices of agricultural 
commodities continued to crash throughout 

144Henry Havelock, who was sent to deal 
with the situation, defeated Nana Sahib 
the day after the massacre. Neill, who was 
left there, took terrible vengeance and 
those whom he regarded as guilty were 
executed. Towards the close of November 

Tantia Topi seized Kanpur but it was soon 
recovered by Campbell.
  Jhansi Rani Laxmi Bai
 Nana Sahib 
The Lucknow residency, defended 
by Henry Lawrence fell into the hands 

of rebels. Havelock marched towards 
Lucknow after defeating Nana Sahib, 
but he had to retire. By the close of July 
John Nicholson sent by John Lawrence 

to capture Delhi succeeded in capturing 
Delhi. The Mughal emperor Bahadur Shah 
II now became a prisoner and his two sons 

and grandson were shot dead after their 
surrender.  
Resistance in Oudh was prolonged 
because of the involvement of talukdars 
as well as peasants in the revolt. Many of 

these taluqdars were loyal to the Nawab 
of Awadh, and they joined Begum Hazrat 
Mahal (the wife of the NawabWajid Ali 
Shah) in Lucknow to fight the British. 
Since a vast majority of the sepoys were 

from peasant families in the villages of 
Oudh, the grievances of the peasants had 
affected them. Oudh was the nursery 

of the Bengal Army for a long time. The 
sepoys from Oudh complained of low 
levels of pay and the difficulty of getting 
leave. They all rallied behind Begum 
Hazrat Mahal. Led by Raja Jailal Singh, 

they fought against the British forces 
In every sense, therefore, 1857 was 
a climatic year. The cartridge affair turned 

out to be a trigger factor for the rebellion. 
The dispossessed, discontented rajas, 
ranis, zamindars and tenants, artisans and 

workers, the Muslim intelligentsia, priests, 
and the Hindu pandits saw the eruption as 
an opportunity to redress their grievances.
Course of the Revolt The rebellion first began as a mutiny in 

Barrackpore (near Calcutta). Mangal 
Pandey murdered his officer in January 
1857 and a mutiny broke out there. In 
the following month, at Meerut, of the 90 
sepoys who were to receive their cartridges 

only five obeyed orders. On 10 May three 
sepoy regiments revolted, killed their 
officers, and released those who had been 

imprisoned. The next day they reached 
Delhi, murdered Europeans, and seized 
that city. The rebels proclaimed Bahadur 
Shah II as emperor. 
  Mangal Pandey
 Bahadur Shah II
By June the revolt had spread to 
Rohilkhand, where the whole countryside 

was in rebellion. Khan Bahadur Khan 
proclaimed himself the viceroy of 
the Emperor of India. Nearly all of 
Bundelkhand and the entire Doab region 

were up in arms against the British. At 
Jhansi, Europeans were massacred and 
Laxmi Bai, aged 22, was enthroned. In 

Kanpur Nana Sahib led the rebels. About 
125 English women and their children 
along with English officers were killed 
and their bodies were thrown into a well. 
Termed as the Kanpur massacre, this 

incident angered the British and General 

145Queen Victoria
Hereafter India would be governed by 
and in the name of the British Monarch 
through a Secretary of State. The 
Secretary of State was to be assisted 
by a Council of India consisting of 
fifteen members. As a result, the 

Court of Directors and the Board of 
Control of the East India Company 
were abolished and the Crown and 

Parliament became constitutionally 
responsible for the governance of 
India. The separate army of the East 
India Company was abolished and 
merged with that of Crown.
Proclamation endorsed the treaties 

made by the Company with Indian 
princes, promised to respect their 
rights, dignity and honour, and 
disavowed any ambition to extend the 
existing British possessions in India.
˜e new council of 1861 was to have 

Indian nomination, since the Parliament 
thought the Legislative Council of 
1853 consisted of only Europeans who 
had never bothered to consult Indian 
opinion and that led to the crisis.
The Doctrine of Lapse and the policy 

of annexation to be given up. A general 
amnesty (pardon) to be granted to 
the rebels except those who directly 
involved in killing the British subjects.
and seized control of˚Lucknow˚and she 

declared her son, Birjis Qadra, as the 
ruler (Wali) of Oudh. Neill who wreaked 

terrible vengeance in Kanpur was shot 
dead in the street fighting at Lucknow. 
Lucknow could be finally captured only in 
March 1858.
Neill™s statue on the Mount Road, 
Madras angered the Indian nationalists. 
 ˜e Congress Ministry of Rajaji (1937-39) 
removed it and lodged it in the Madras 

Museum.
Hugh Rose besieged Jhansi and 
defeated Tantia Topi early in April. 
Yet Lakshmi Bai audaciously captured 
Gwalior forcing pro-British Scindia to flee. 
Rose with his army directly confronted 
Lakshmi Bai. In this battle Lakshmi Bai 
died fighting admirably. Rose described 

Lakshmi Bai as the best and bravest 
military leader of the rebels. 
Gwalior was recaptured soon. In July 
1858 Canning announced the suppression 

of the ﬁMutinyﬂ and restoration of peace. 
Tantia Topi was captured and executed in 

April 1859.
Bahadur Shah II, captured in 
September 1857, was tried and declared 
guilty. He was exiled to Rangoon 
(Myanmar), where he died in November 
1862 at the age of 87. With his death the 

Mughal dynasty came to an end.
Effects of the Great RebellionQueen™s Proclamation 1858A Royal Durbar was held at Allahabad 
on November 1, 1858. The proclamation 
issued by Queen Victoria was read at the 
Durbar by Lord Canning, who was the last 
Governor General and the first Viceroy of 
India.

146Hopes of a revival of the past diminished 
and the traditional structure of Indian 
society began to break down. A 
Westernized English-educated middle 
class soon emerged with a heightened 
sense of nationalism.
The educational and˚public works 

programmes (roads, railways, 
telegraphs, and irrigation) were 
stimulated by the realization of their 
value for the movement of troops in 
times of emergency.
SUMMARYThe resistance of Haider and Tipu against the Company government, leading to 

four Anglo-Mysore Wars is dealt with.
The rebellions of Puli Thevar, Veera Pandiya  Kattabomman, Velu Nachiyar, 

Marudu Brothers, all southern palayakkarars, and Theeran Chinnamalai in the 
Kongu region are explained
The last ditch battle of southern palayakkarars in association with the dethroned 
kings and rulers in south India under the aegis of Tipu™s surviving sons interned in 
Vellore fort is highlighted.
The 1857 rebellion of kings of displaced Jagirdars and Zamindars, and peasants 
that shook the foundation of the British empire are discussed in detail.
The transfer of India to the British crown with the Queen™s proclamation of 1858 

and its salient features are examined. ˚
EXERCISE I Choose the correct answer:-
 1. _________ became the de  facto ruler of Mysore against the Wodeyar kings after 
successfully handling the Marathas.
 (a) Haider Ali
 (b) Nanjaraja
 (c) Nagama Nayak
 (d) Tipu Sultan
 2. Tipu Sultan™s capture of _______ led to the third Anglo-Mysore War.
 (a) Calicut
 (b) Coorg
 (c) Cranganore
 (d) Dindigul
 3. The Palayakkarar system was originally practised in _____ Kingdom.
 (a) Vijayanagar
 (b) Bahmani
 (c) Kakatiya
 (d) Hoysala
 4. ______ brought Puli Thevar™s three major forts, Nerkattumseval, Vasudevanallur amd 

Panayur under his control.
 (a) Mafus Khan
 (b) Yusuf Khan
 (c) Colonel Heron
 (d) Nabikhan Kattak
 5. Velu Nachiyar was the daughter of Raja of _____.
 (a) Sivagangai
 (b) Pudhukkotai
 (c) Ramanathapuram
 (d) Palavanatham
 6. _______ was the collector who was dismissed from service for mishandling the affairs of 

Veera Pandiya Kattabomman.
 (a) W.C. Jackson
 (b) A. Bannerman
 (c) S.R. Lushington
 (d) P.A. Agnew

147 7. The immediate cause for the Vellore Revolt was the introduction of ______.
 (a) En˙eld Ri˘e
 (b) Dress code
 (c) New turban 
 (d) Greased Cartridges
 8. ________ inspired Kol uprising of Santhals.
 (a) Bhindrai Manki 
 (b) Sido (c) Buddha Bagat
 (d) Kanoo
 9. _____ was the Governor-General of India when the great Rebellian of 1857 broke out.
 (a) Dalhonsie
 (b) Canning
 (c) Minto
 (d) James Andrew Ramsay
 10. _________ defeated Nana Sahib™s forus during the 1857 Rebelliion.
 (a) Henry Lawrence
 (b) Major General Havelock
 (c) Sir Hugh Wheeler
 (d) General Neill
 II A. Find out the correct statement
 (i) Warren Hastings wanted to deal with Tipu Sultan in a revengeful manner
 (ii)  ˜e elimination of Tipu and restoration of the old Wodeyar dynasty to the Mysore 
Kingdom marked the real beginning of company™s rule in the south
 (iii) ˜e Nawab of Arcot gave support to Velu Nachiyar
 (iv) ˜e temple of Kalayarkoil is in the heart of Tirunelveli forests.
  B. 
Assertion (A):
 The fort of Sivagiri was eminently suited both for offensive and defensive 
operations.
  Reason (R):
 It is at the foot of Western Ghats with formidable barriers around it.
  (a) A is correct; R is not the correct explanation of A.
  (b) Both A and R are wrong.
  (c) A is correct; R is the correct explanation of A.
  (d) A is wrong; R is correct.
 III Match the following:
  1. Gillespie
 - Srirangapatnam
  2. Manji
 - Barrackpore
  3. Jacobin Club
 - Vellore Revolt
  4. Mangal Pandey
 - Santhals
  (a) 1, 2, 3, 4 (b) 3, 4, 1, 2 (c) 3, 2, 1, 4 (d) 2, 3, 4, 1 IV A answer briefly
 1. Write a note on the humiliating terms of the Treaty of Srirangapatnam (1792) imposed on 
Tipu Sultan.
 2. What do you know of ﬁPagodaﬂ?
 3. What is the revolt of Theeran Chinnamalai of Kongu region?
 4. Explain Sail Rakab.
 5. Kanpur Massacre.

148 V Answer the following
 1. Narrate the circumstances that led to the signing of the Treaty of Madras between the 
English and Haider Ali.
 2. Rebellion of 1801.
 3. Vellore Revolt of 1806.
 4. Discuss the uprising of Kols.
 5. The effects of the Great Rebellion of 1857.
 VI Answer in detail
 1. Explain the organization of Palayakkarar system in South Tamilnadu.
 2. Describe the causes and the course of the Vellore Revolt of 1806.
 3. Discuss the causes and results of Great Rebellion of 1857.
 VII Avtivities
 1. Attempt life sketch of Yusuf Khan.
 2. Highlight the role played by Nana Fadnavis in the Great Rebellion of 1857.
 VIII Assignments
 1. Enact a drama on Veera Pandiya  Kattabomman.
 2. Visit the Vellore Fort and collect information on its structure.
GLOSSARYProtracted lasting for a long timePre-empt take action in order to prevent
evasiveness avoidable
Irkedirritated FightElude EscapeObnoxious Offensive
Cockade a small ribbon on a hatAnathema DetestableVolley arms togetherShunavoid
Parleysholding discussion
149  REFERENCES 1. Bipan Chandra,˚
India™s Struggle for Independence 1857-1947,˚
New Delhi: Penguin Books, 
1989. 2. S. Kadhirvel,˚
History of Maravas,
˚Madurai, 1977
 3. Manikumar, K.A., 
Vellore Revolt, 1806
, Allied Publishers, 2007
 4. Gopalakrishnan,S., Dr., ed.,˚
The South Indian Rebellions Œ Before and After 1800
, Chennai: 
Palaniappa Brothers, 2007.
 5. Sekhar Bandyopadhyay,˚
From Plassey˚ to Partition and After Œ A History of Modern 
India,˚
Orient BlackSwan, 2004.
 6. Framod K. Nayar,˚
The Great Uprising Œ India 1857,˚
New Delhi: Penguin Books, 2007.
TIME LINE (AD/CE)Treaty of Madras
1769Second Mysore War begins
1780Death of Haider Ali
1782Treaty of Paris
1783Treaty of Mangalore
1784Vellore Revolt
1806Great Rebellion
1857Queen Victoria Proclamation
1858
150IntroductionBy the first quarter of the nineteenth 
century, India had produced a small 
English-educated intelligentsia, closely 
associated with British administration or 
British trade. The ideas and the work of 
the Christian missionaries had already 

begun to have its impact. Bengal was 
the first province to be affected by the 
British influence and so it was here that 

several ideas of reform originated. British 
administration, English education, and 
European literature brought to India a 
new wave of thoughts that challenged 
traditional knowledge. Rationalism as 

the basis for ethical thinking, the idea 
of human progress and evolution, the 
concept of natural rights associated 
with the Enlightenment, were the new 
ideas which led to what has been termed 

as Indian Renaissance. The spread of 
printing technology played a crucial role 
in the diffusion of ideas.
19.1  
Emergence of Reform Movements˜e British characterized Indian society in the 

nineteenth century as being caught in a vicious 
circle of superstitions and obscurantism. In 
their view idolatry and polytheism reinforced 
orthodoxy impelling the people to follow 
them blindly. ˜e social conditions were 

equally depressing. And the condition of 
women was deplorable. ˜e practice of sati 
came in for particular condemnation. ˜e 

division of society according to birth resulting 
in the caste system was also criticized. Most 
importantly, the British argued that without 
their intervention there was no possibility 
of deliverance from these evils for Indians. 

Needless to say, this was a self-serving 
argument, articulated by missionaries and 
Utilitarians 
to justify British rule.
Utilitarians:
 believers in the doctrine of 
greatest happiness of the greatest number
Towards Modernity19Lesson
Learning ObjectivesTo acquaint oneself with
Socio-Religious reforms initiated by Brahmo Samaj, Prarthana Samaj and Arya 

Samaj
Ramakrishna Mission and the teachings of Swami Vivekananda
Theosophical Society, Satya Shodhak Samaj, Sri Narayana Guru Dharma 

Paripalana Yogam.
Islamic Reform Movements and Reform Movements in Tamilnadu
Contributions of Christian Missionaries

151India was a much bigger, more 
complex and diverse country in the early 
nineteenth century. Conditions varied vastly 
across it. ˜e social and cultural evils had 
been fought by Indian reformers through 
the ages. But the advent of the British with 

their Enlightenment ideas undoubtedly 
posed a new challenge. ˜is chapter looks at 
how social reform movements emerged in 

various parts of the country.
The development of the Western 
culture and ideology forced the traditional 
institutions to revitalize themselves. 
During the second half of the nineteenth 

century, the expression of protest and 
desire for change were articulated 
through various reform movements. 
These movements aimed at reforming and 
democratizing the social institutions and 

religious outlook of the Indian people. 
The emergence of new economic forces, 
spread of education, growth of nationalist 

sentiment, influence of modern Western 
thoughts, ideas and culture, and awareness 
of the changes taking place in Europe 
strengthened the resolve to reform. 
What gave these reform movements 
an ideological unity were rationalism, 

religious universalism and humanism. 
This perspective enabled them to adopt 
a rational approach to tradition and 
evaluate the contemporary socio-religious 

practices from the standpoint of social 
utility. For example, Raja Rammohun Roy 
repudiated the infallibility of the Vedas 

and during the Aligarh Movement, Syed 
Ahmed Khan emphasized that religious 
tenets were not immutable. As Keshab 
Chandra Sen said, ‚Our position is not 
that truths are to be in all religions, but 

that all established religions of the World 
are true.™
These movements enveloping the 
entire cultural stream of Indian society 
brought about significant practices in 

the realms of language, religion, art and 
philosophy. These reform movements can 
be broadly classified into two categories:
 1. Reformist Movements 
 2. Revivalist Movements
Both the movements depended in varying 

degrees on an appeal to the lost purity 
of religion. The primary difference 

between them lay in the degree to which 
they relied on tradition or on reason and 
conscience. The social reform movements 

formed an integral part of the religious 
reforms primarily because all the efforts 
towards social ills like caste- and genderŒ
based inequality derived legitimacy 
from religion. Initially, the social reform 

movement had a narrow social base Œ 
they were limited to the upper and middle 
strata of the society that tried to adjust 
their modernized views to the existing 
social reality. From then on, the social 

reform movements began to percolate to 
the lower strata of society to reconstruct 
the social fabric. Heated debates among 

the intellectuals expressed in the form 
of public arguments, tracts and journals 
played a big role in taking new ideas to 
large sections of the people, as well as to 
reformulate older ideas in a new form.
At the start, organizations such as the 
Social Conference, Servants of India and the 

Christian missionaries were instrumental 
in giving an impetus to the social reform 
movements along with many enlightened 

individuals about whom we dwell on in the 
following pages. In later years, especially 
by the twentieth century, the national 

movement provided the leadership and 
organization for social reform.
Brahmo Samaj (1828)Raja Rammohun Roy, was a man of versatile 
genius. He established the Brahmo Samaj 
in August, 1828. The Brahmo Samaj was 
committed to ﬁthe worship and adoration 
of the eternal, unsearchable, immutable 

152there was a steady decline but for the new 
lease life given to it by Devendranath 
Tagore (father of Rabindranath Tagore). 
After him the organization was taken 
forward by Keshab Chandra Sen from 
1857. The strength of the organization is 

known from the number of branches it 
had in 1865, 54 Samajas (fifty in Bengal, 
two in North West Province, one each 

in Punjab and Madras). In course of 
time, the Brahmo Samaj broke into two 
namely Devendranath Tagore™s, ‚Brahmo 
Samaj of India™ and Keshub Chandra Sen™s 
‚Sadharan Brahmo Samaj™.  
In Tamilnadu, Kasi Viswanatha 
Mudaliar was an adherent of the Samaj 

and he wrote a play titled 
Brahmo Samaja 
Natakam 
to expound the ideas of the 
Samaj. He also wrote a tract in support 
of widow remarriage. In 1864, a Tamil 
journal titled 
Tathuva Bodhini
 was started 
for the cause of the Brahmo Samaja.
The Brahmo Samaj met with great 
opposition from orthodox elements in 
Bengal society such as the Hindu Dharma 
Sabha. However, there were also reformers 
such as Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar, who 

advocated the same ideas but drew on 
Hindu scriptures as authority.
Even though the Brahmo  Samaj 
did not win many adherents, it had a big 
impact on the intellectuals. In the early 

stages, many young men seized of the 
radical ideas avidly propagated them. 
Tagore™s family was a Brahmo family and 

its influence can be seen in his writings 
and ideas.
The Prarthana Samaj (1867)An o˚-shoot of the Brahmo Samaj, the 
Prarthana Samaj, was founded in 1867 in 
Bombay by Atmaram Pandurang (1823Œ
98). ˜e Prarthana Samaj as an organization 
never had any great in˛uence but its 
members, like M. G. Ranade (1852-1901), 

R. G. Bhandarkar, and K.T. Telang, were 
Being who is the Author and Preserver 
of the Universeﬂ. His long term agenda 
was to purify Hinduism and to preach 

monotheism for which he drew authority 
from the Vedas. He emphasized human 
dignity, opposed idolatry and social evils 
such as sati. A retired servant of the East 
India Company, he was conversant in many 

languages including Persian and Sanskrit. 
His ideas and activities were aimed at the 
political uplift of society through social 
reform. He was a determined crusader 
against the inhuman practice of Sati. 

His tract written in 1818, 
A Conference 
Between an Advocate for and an Opponent 

of the Practice of Burning Widows
, cited 
sacred texts to prove that no religion 
sanctioned the burning alive of widows. 
His efforts fructified and the Company 
through an enactment of law (1829) 
declared the practice of sati a crime. 
The overall contribution of Brahmo 
Samaj can be summed up as follows
 1. It denounced polytheism, idol 

worship, and the faith in divine 
avatars
 (incarnations)
 2. It condemned the caste system, 
dogmas and superstitions.
 3. It wanted the abolition of child 

marriage, 
purdah
 system and the 
practice of sati
 4. It supported widow remarriage
Raja Rammohun Roy
Inspired by the ideals of the French 
Revolution, Rammohun Roy left for 
Europe and died in Bristol. After his death 

153years he wandered around India. In 1863 
he became a wandering preacher, and five 
years later he added the establishment of 
schools to his activities. In 1872 he met the 
Brahmos in Calcutta. In 1875 he founded 
the Arya Samaj and published his major 

work the 
Satyarth Prakash. 
In his view, 
contemporary Hinduism had become 

degenerate. Therefore he rejected puranas, 

polytheism, idolatry, the role of Brahmin 
priests, pilgrimages, many rituals and the 
prohibition on widow marriage. As a good 
Sanskrit scholar, he made a call toﬁBack to 
the Vedasﬂ. He wanted to shape society on 

the basis of the Vedas. He disregarded the 
puranas. Like the other social reformers, 
he encouraged female education and 
remarriage of widows. 
Swami Dayananda™s sphere of 
influence was largely in the Punjab region 

where the trading community of Khatris 
experienced great mobility in colonial 

times. However, in the Punjab region, 
there was much communal conflict among 
Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs. Dayananda™s 
Shuddi 
(purification) movement i.e., 
conversion of non-Hindus to Hindus was 
controversial and provoked controversies 
especially with the Ahmadiya movement. 
Arya Samaj is considered to be 
a revivalist movement. Dayananda™s 
influence continued into the twentieth 

century through the establishment of 
Dayananad Anglo Vedic (DAV) schools 
and colleges.
Ramakrishna Mission (1897)As we saw above, the early reform 

movements in Bengal were radical, 
questioning and criticising tradition very 
strongly. In response to this emerged the 
Ramakrishna Mission as an important 
religious movement. Ramakrishna 

Paramahamsa (1836Œ1886), a poor priest 
in a temple at Dakshineswar near Kolkata, 
had no formal education but led an 
among the great leaders of nineteenth-
century Maharashtra and they became the 
founders of the social reform movement in 

later years. 
Prarthana Samaj was similar to 
Brahmo Samaj, but it was consciously 
linked with the 
bhakti 
tradition of the 
Maharashtrian saints. The Prarathana 
Samaj continued its work mainly through 
educational work directed at women and 
workers at the lower level. It concentrated 
on social reforms like inter-dining, inter-
marriage, remarriage of widows, and 

uplift of women and depressed classes.
˜e National Social Conference 
organized at the initiative of M.G. Ranade 
met each year immediately a˝er the Indian 
National Congress (1885) annual sessions. 
Justice Ranade  was an erudite scholar 
with a keen intellect and under his able 
guidance the Prarthana Samaj became the 

active centre of a new social reformation in 
western India. He was one of the founders 
of the Widow Marriage Association and was 
an ardent promoter of the famous 
Deccan 
Education Society. 
Its object was to impart 

such education to the young as would ˙t 
them for the unsel˙sh service of the country. 
When Ranade died in 1901, his leadership 

was taken over by Chandavarkar.
Arya Samaj (1875)Dayananda Saraswati
The founder of the Arya Samaj was 

Dayananda Saraswati (1824Œ83). 
Dayananda, a Gujarati, left home in his 
youth to become an ascetic. For seventeen 

154intense spiritual life. He had a deep faith 
in the inherent truth of all religions and 
tested its belief by performing religious 
service in accordance with the practices 
of different religions. According to him 
‚all the religious views are but different 

ways to lead to the same goal.™ In a 
backlash, the later generation of Western 
educated intellectuals were drawn to 

Ramakrishna™s broad view, mysticism and 
spiritual fervour. He expounded his views 
in short stories and admirable parables 
which were compiled by an admirer as 
Ramakrishna Kathamrita
 (The Gospel of 
Sri Ramakrishna).
  Ramakrishna 
 Swami Vivekananda
  Paramahamsa
 The most famous among his 
disciples was a young graduate of the 
Calcutta University named Narendranath 
Dutta, afterwards famously called Swami 
Vivekananda(1863Œ1902). Emphasising 
practical work over philosophizing he 

established the modern institution of 
the Ramakrishna Mission. He carried 
Ramakrishna™s message all over India 

and the world. His learning, eloquence, 
spiritual fervour and personality gathered 
round him a band of followers across the 
country, many of whom also joined the 

national movement. He attended in 1893 
the famous, ‚Parliament of Religions™ at 
Chicago, and made a deep impact on those 
congregated there. The Mission opened 
schools, dispensaries and orphanages and 

helped people during their time of distress 
caused by calamities.
Theosophical Society (1886)Even as Indian intellectuals felt challenged 
by western Enlightenment and rationalistic 
movements, there was a strain of thinking 
in the West which looked to the East for 
spiritual salvation. From this idea emerged 
the ˜eosophical Society, founded by 

Madam H.P. Blavatsky and Colonel H.S. 
Olcott in the United States of America 
in 1875. ˜ey came to India in 1879 and 

established their headquarters at Adyar in 
1886. Under the leadership of Annie Besant, 
who came to India in 1893, the ˜eosophical 
Society gathered strength and won many 
adherents. The Theosophical Society 

started associations across south India. 
˜ough involved in many controversies, 
the Society played an important role in the 
revival of Buddhism in India. Iyotheethoss 
Pandithar, the radical Dalit thinker, was 

introduced to modern Buddhism through 
his interaction with Colonel Olcott who 
took him to Sri Lanka. ˜ere he met many 

Buddhist monks including the renowned 
revivalist Anagarika Dharmapala and 
Acharya Sumangala.
19.2  
Satya Shodhak Samaj (1873)  Jyotiba Phule
 Savitri Phule
Swami Vivekananda was a personi˙cation 
of youth and boldness and referred to as the 
Morning Star of the Modern India. In the 

words of Valentine Chirol, ‚the ˙rst Hindu 

whose personality won demonstrative 

recognition abroad for India™s ancient 

civilization and for her newborn claim to 

nationhood.™

155Phule also tried to translate his 
ideas into actual struggles. He urged the 
British Government to impart compulsory 
primary education to the masses through 
teachers drawn from the cultivating classes. 
He started a school for girls in Poona in 

1851 and one for depressed classes with the 
assistance of his wife Savitri. He also started 
schools for the "untouchables" and founded 

a home for widow™s children. 
In his work we find the beginnings 
of the later day non-Brahman movement 
of Maharashtra.
Pandita Ramabai (1858Œ1922)Pandita Ramabai
Pandita Ramabai was foremost among 
the Indian leaders who worked for the 
emancipation of women. She came from a 
learned family and was a great scholar of 
Sanskrit and addressed many learned groups 
in di˚erent parts of the country. She was 

given the title of ﬁPanditaﬂ and ﬁSaraswatiﬂ 
for her deep knowledge of Sanskrit. A˝er 
the death of her parents she and her brother 

travelled to di˚erent parts of the country. 
˜ey went to Calcutta in 1878. Two years 
later her brother also died. A little later in 
1880 she married a Bengali belonging to a 
family of lower social status. ˜us, even at 

that time she was bold enough to marry 
a man of a di˚erent caste and di˚erent 
language. A˝er the death of her husband 
two years later she returned to Poona and 
started the Arya Mahila Samaj with the help 

of leaders like Ranade and Bhandarkar. 300 
women were educated in the Samaj in 1882.
While the movements discussed above 
were largely focussed on upper castes there 
were some exceptional movements which 
mobilized lower castes and articulated their 

perspective. ˜e most important among 
them was Jyotiba Phule, who belonged to the 
Mali (gardener) community. Born in 1827, 

he received initial education in a mission 
school but had to discontinue it in 1833. 
Jyotiba Phule waged a life-long struggle 
against upper caste tyranny. In his quest for 
the truth, Phule read the Vedas, the Manu 

Samhita, the Puranas, and the thought of 
Buddha, Mahavira and the medieval Bhakti 
saints extensively. He also acquainted himself 
with Western thought, and Christian and 
Islamic religions. Phule judged the whole 

culture and tradition through the spirit of 
rationality and equality. While the principle 
of equality called for a total rejection of 

caste system, authoritarian family structure 
and subordination of women, the principle 
of rationality demanded the removal of 
superstitions and ritualism.
Phule held radical views on social, 
religious, political and economic issues. He 

considered the caste system as an antithesis 
of the principle of human equality. He sought 
to raise the morale of the non-Brahmins and 
united them to revolt against the centuries 

old inequality and social degradation.  
Towards this end Phule founded the 
Satya 
Shodak Samaj
 (Society for Seeking Truth) in 
1875. His most important book is 
Gulamgiri
 (Slavery).
Phule looked upon education of the 
masses as a liberating and revolutionary 
factor.
Since women and deprived and 
downtrodden were the worst sufferers in 

the society, Phule argued that women™s 
liberation was linked with the liberation of 
other classes in society. Equality between 
classes as also between men and women 
was stressed by Phule. During marriages 

he asked the bridegroom to promise the 
right of education to his bride. 

156streets of Vaikom made a deep impact on 
subsequent temple entry movements. 
19.3  
Islamic Reform 
Movements˜e Revolt of 1857 and its brutal suppression 

by the British had an adverse impact on 
the Muslims of South Asia. While they 
were viewed with suspicion by the British 
for the 1857 insurgency, the Muslims 
themselves withdrew into a shell and did 

not use the opportunities opened up by 
colonial modernity. Consequently, they 
lagged behind in education and attendant 

employment opportunities. In this context, 
a few decades later some reform movements 
emerged among the Muslims.
Aligarh Movement (1875)Syed Ahmad Khan
Aligarh Movement was started by Syed 

Ahmad Khan in 1875. He wanted to 
reconcile Western scientific education 
with the teachings of the Quran. The 
Aligarh movement aimed at spreading (i) 
Modern education among Indian Muslims 

without weakening their allegiance to 
Islam, and (ii) Social reforms among 
Muslims relating to purdah, polygamy, 

and divorce.
Syed™s progressive social ideas were 
propagated through his magazine 
Tahdhib-
ul-Akhluq
 (Improvement of Manners and 

Morals).  Syed Ahmad Khan™s educational 

programme emphasized from the outset 
Ramabai started the Sharada Sadan 
(shelter for homeless) for the destitute 

widows with the help of Ranade and 
Bhandarkar. But soon she was accused of 
converting Hindu women to Christianity 

and hence had to shift her activities to 
Khedgoan near Poona. She established a 
Mukti Sadan (freedom house) there. Soon 

there were 2000 children and women in 
the house. Vocational training was given 
make them self-reliant.
Sri Narayana Guru˜is movement emerged in Kerala and 

was born out of con˚ict between the 
depressed classes and the upper castes. It 
was started by Sri Narayana Guru (1854-
1928) spearheading a social movement 
of the Ezhavas of  Kerala, a community of 

toddy tappers. ˜e Ezhavas were the single 
largest group in Kerala constituting 26% of 
population. A great scholar in Malayalam, 

Tamil and Sanskrit, Sri Narayana Guru 
established the Sri Narayana Guru Dharma 
Paripalana (SNDP) Yogam in 1902. ˜e 
SNDP Yogam took up several issues such 
as (i) right of admission to public schools. 

(ii) recruitment to government services. 
 (iii) access to roads and entry to temples; and 

(iv) political representation. ˜e movement 
as a whole brought transformative 
structural changes such as upward social 

mobility, shi˛ in traditional distribution 
of power and a federation of ‚backward 
classes™ into a large conglomeration. As a 

response to the prohibition on Ezhavas into 
temples, Sri Narayana Guru established new 
temples, and empowered the community to 
modernize itself. Great personalities such 
as the poet Kumaran Asan Dr. Palpu and 

Sahodaran Ayyappan emerged from the 
movement, and made a lasting impact in 
the democratization of Kerala Society. Even 
though the Guru himself was not directly 
involved in the movement, the Vaikom 

Satyagraha, organized to protest against the 
ban on the entry of Ezhavas on the temple 

157primary work was to defend Islam against 
the polemics of the Arya Samaj and the 
Christian missionaries. In social morals the 
Ahmadiya movement was conservative, 
adhering to polygamy, veiling of women, 
and the classical rules of divorce. 
The Deoband Movement (1866)˜e Deoband movement was organised by 

the orthodox section among the Muslim 
ulemas as a revivalist movement with the 
twin objective of propagating the pure 
teachings of the Quran and Hadis among 
Muslims. ˜e movement was established 

in Deoband in Saranpur district (by 
Mohammad Qasim Nanotavi (1833-1877) 
and Rashid Ahmed Gangohi (1828Œ1905) 

to train religious leaders for the Muslim 
community. In contrast to the Aligarh 
Movement, which aimed at the welfare of 
Muslims through Western education and 
support of the British Government, the aim 

of the Deoband Movement was religious 
regeneration of the Muslim community. ˜e 
instruction imparted at Deoband adhered 
to classical Islamic tradition. 
˜e seminary at Deoband was 
founded in 1867 by theologians of the 

School of Wali-Allah. Muhammad Qasim 
Nanotavi took a prominent part in counter-

polemics against the Christian missionaries 
and the Arya Samajists. ˜e principal 
objectives of the seminary at Deoband 
were to re-establish contact between the 
theologians and the educated Muslim 

middle classes, and to revive the study of 
Muslim religious and scholastic sciences. As 
a religious university Deoband soon became 
an honoured institution, not only in Muslim 
India but also in the world of Islam at large.
Nadwat al-‚ulamaA school less conservative than Deoband 

and more responsive to the demands 
of the modern age was the Nadwat al-
‚ulama,™ founded in 1894 at Lucknow by the 
the advantages of the use of English as 

the medium of instruction. In 1864 he 
founded a Scienti˙c Society of Aligarh 
for the introduction of Western sciences 
through translations into Urdu of works on 
physical sciences. ˜e same year he founded 

a modern school at Ghazipur. In 1868 
he promoted the formation of education 
committees in several districts, to initiate 
modern education among the Muslims.
During his visit to Europe in 
1869Œ70 he developed the plans of his 

life-work, a major educational institution 
for Indian Muslims. In order to promote 

English education among the Muslims, 
he founded in 1875 a modern school at 
Aligarh, which soon developed into the 
Muhammdan AngloŒOriental College 
(1877).  This college was to become the 

Muslim University after his death. It 
became the nursery of Muslim political 
and intellectual leaders. 
In 1886 Syed Ahmad Khan founded 
the Muhammedan Anglo Oriental 

Educational Conference as a general 
forum for spreading liberal ideas among 
the Indian Muslims.  He rejected blind 

adherence to religious law and asked for a 
reinterpretation of the Quran in the light 
of reason to suit the new trends of the 
time. He attempted to liberalize Indian 
Islam and made it amenable to new ideas 

and new interpretations. In this mission 
he had to face the brunt of vehement 
attacks of orthodox theologians
.Ahmadiya Movement (1889)The Ahmadiya movement founded by 

Mirza Ghulam Ahmed (1835Œ1908) in 
1889 established a different trend. While 
emphasizing the return to the original 
principles enunciated in the Quran, 
Ghulam Ahmed became controversial 

when he claimed to be a Messiah, which 
was considered heretical by mainstream 
Islam. But he won many converts. His 

15819.5  
Sikh Reform 
Movement˜e Sikh community could not remain 
untouched by the rising tide of rationalist 
and progressive ideas of the nineteenth 
century. ˜e Singh Sabha Movement was 
formed in 1873, with a two-fold objective (i) 
to make available modern western education 

to the Silkhs (ii) to counter the proselytizing 
activities of Christian missionaries as well 
as Hindu revivalists. A network of Khalsa 

Schools was established throughout Punjab. 
˜e Akali movement was an o˚shoot of 
the Singh Sabha Movement. ˜e Akali 
movement aimed at liberating the Sikh 
Gurudwara from the corrupt control of the 

Udasi Mahants (priests). ˜e Government 
passed the Sikh Gurudwara Act in 1922 
(amended in 1925), which gave control 
to Shiromani Gurudwara Prabandhak 
Committee (SGPC) as the main body. 
19.6  
Reform Movements in TamilnaduAs we saw earlier, the reform movements 

of the north India had its own impact 
on Tamilnadu. Brahmo Samaj and Arya 
Samaj had their branches. Keshab Chandra 
Sen visited Madras and lectured here. 
But Tamilnadu also saw its own reform 

movements.
Vaikunda Swamigal (1809-1851)Vaikunda Swamigal
historian  Shibli Nu‚mani and other scholars. 
˜e school aimed to o˚er an enlightened 

interpretation of religion in order to ˙ght 
the trends of agnosticism and atheism which 
had followed the advent of modern Western 
education. 
Farangi MahalThe third famous traditional school is 
the much older one at Farangi Mahal in 
Lucknow. Farangi Mahal accepted Sufism 
as a valid experience and a valid field of 
study. Another traditionalist movement 
was the 
ahl-i-hadith 
or of the followers of 
the dicta of the Prophet.
19.4  
Parsi Reform 
MovementsZoroastrians, persecuted in their Persian 

homeland, migrated in large numbers to 
the west coast of India in the tenth century. 
As a trading community they ˛ourished 
over the centuries. A close-knit community 
it too was not le˝ untouched by the reform 

movements of the nineteenth century. 
˜e Rahnumai Madayasnan Sabha 
(Religious Reform Association) was 

founded in 1851 by a group of English 
educated Parsis for the ﬁregeneration of 
the social conditions of the Parsis and the 
restoration of the Zoroastrian religion to its 
pristine purityﬂ. ˜e movement had Naoroji 

Furdonji, Dadabhai Naoroji, K.ˆR.ˆCama 
and S.S. Bengalee  as its leaders. ˜e message 
of reform was spread by the newspaper 
Rast-Go˜ar
 (Truth Teller). Parsi religious 
rituals and practices were reformed and 

the Parsi creed rede˙ned. In the social 
sphere, attempts were made to upli˝ the 
status of Parsi women through education, 

removal of the purdah, raising the age of 
marriage and the like. Gradually, the Parsis 
emerged as the most westernised section of 
the Indian society. ˜ey played a key role 
in the nationalist movement and in the 

industrialization of India. 

159Tangals, caste-based restrictions were 
broken down.ˆThe Vaikunda Swamy cult 
posed a serious challenge to the spread 
of Christianity in south Travancore even 
after his death in 1851.
Vallalar Ramalinga Swamigal (1823Œ1874)Ramalinga Adigal
Ramalinga Swamigal was born in a modest 
family near Chidambaram and spent his 
early life in Madras. He never had formal 
schooling, but exhibited great scholarship. 
Inspired by the Saiva ˜evaram and 
˜iruvasagam hymns, he began to compose 

moving poems on his own. In his time, Saiva 
religion was in the grip of Saiva monasteries 
such as those at Thiruvaduthurai, 

Dharumapuram and Thiruppanandal. 
Ramalinga Swamigal™s poems expressed 
radical ideas and condemned bigotry and 
irrationality. He underwent certain mystical 
experiences which he expressed in his poems. 

˜is was resented by the orthodox elements 
in Saiva religion. He established the Sathya 
Dharma Salai at Vadalur where he began to 
feed poor people, especially in the context of 
the 1860s famine and pestilence, irrespective 

of caste and creed. He founded the Sathya 
Gnana Sabhai to organize his followers. ˜is 
brought him into con˛ict with established 

Saivite orders, and matters came to a head 
when his followers published his poems 
under the title of 
˚iruvarutpa
 (Songs of 
Grace) in 1867. Orthodox Saivites under 

the Sri Lankan reformer Arumuga Navalar 
˜e Sri Vaikunda Swamigal™s cult, whichˆ 

survives to this day, was organized in 
the 1830s. Born in a poor family (1809) 
at Sastankoil Vilai (now known as 
Swamithoppu), a village then in south 
Travancore (the present day Kanyakumari 

district), Muthukutti, spent his childhood 
in the villageˆ
pial
ˆschool, learning religious 
and moral texts. He also learnt the Bible and 
became well-versed in Christian theology. 
At the age of twenty two, Muthukutti, cured 
of a skin disease, a˝er a holy bath in the 
sea during his visit to the Murugan temple 
at Tiruchendur (˜oothukudi district), 

claimed that Lord Vishnu had given him 
a rebirth as his son. On his return from 
Tiruchendur, assuming the new name of Sri 
Vaikundar, he practised austerities for two 
years. 
Soon his fame spread far and wide.
In his preaching Vaikundar 
attacked the traditional caste-ridden 

Travancore society and its ruler for 

collecting excessive taxes from the lower 
caste people. He was arrested and jailed by 
the Raja of Travancore for his ﬁseditious 
speechesﬂ. When he
ˆwas
 released from jail 
(1838) he became more popular among 
the people. His followers called him 
Aiya 
(father) and his cult came to be known 

as 
Aiya Vazhi
 (path of the father)
. His 
teachings were compiled as a text called 

Akila Thirattu 
which is recited religiously 

to this day.
Vaikunda Swamy instructed his 
followers to give up worship of pudams. 

He also exhorted them not to offer animal 
sacrifices to their deities.ˆHe advocated 
vegetarianism.
As a symbol of protest,ˆVaikunda 
Swamy
ˆurged his followers to wear a turban, 
a right which was permitted only to upper 
castes in those days. As a part of his effort 
to practice equality, Vaikunda Swamy 
regularly organized inter-dining through 
his Samathuva Sangam, among different 

castes.ˆ
In his feeding centres calledˆNilal 

160Kolar Gold Fields. In this movement, M. 
Singavelu and Prof P. Lakshmi Narasu also 
played an important role. Pandithar ran a 
weekly journal called 
Oru Paisa Tamilan
 (later 
Tamilan
) from 1908 until his death. 
19.7 Christian Missionaries The official religious policy of the East 

India Company was one of neutrality 
towards the native religions. Their reason 
for continuing this policy was the belief 
that the earlier Portuguese rule had come 
to an end because of their attempts to 

forcibly convert people to Christianity. 
As a result of this concern, the Company 
government prohibited the entry of 

missionaries into the territories under 
their control.
In 1793 two English missionaries, 
William Carey and John Thomas, both 
Baptists, set out to India with the intention 

of starting a mission. In view of the ban 
on missionary activity they settled down 
in the Danish Colony of Serampore, north 
of Calcutta. Carey, along with two other 
missionaries, Joshua Marshman and 

William Ward established the Serampore 
Mission in 1799.ˆ
The Serampore missionaries were 
the first evangelical Baptist missionaries 

in India. They were followed later by other 
missionary groups belonging to different 
Protestant denominations. Before the 
arrival of the Serampore missionaries, 

several centuries earlier, there were 
Christian missions in the Portuguese 
territory of Goa, and also on the Malabar 
Coast and the Coromandel Coast. The 
work of the earlier missionaries was limited 

both geographically and in terms of the 
number of conversions to Christianity. 
Thus major attempts at proselytization 

began during the nineteenth century.
The missionaries organised 
schools for the socially and economically 
criticized this as blasphemous and launched 

a tract war. But ultimately, Ramalinga 

Swamigal™s contribution was recognized and 
his writings inspired universal ideas, and 
undermined sectarianism in Saiva religion.
Buddhist Revivalism and Iyotheethoss Pandithar  (1845-1914)Iyotheethoss Pandithar
As we saw in an earlier lesson, Buddhism 
had been practically wiped out in the 
Tamil country by the beginning of the 
second millennium. Towards the end of 
the nineteenth century, there was a revival 
of Buddhism. The publication of the 

complete edition of Jeevaka Chintamani 
(1887) and Manimekalai (1898) were 
landmarks in the recovery of heterodox 

traditions. 
But the most important figure 
was Iyotheethoss Pandithar (1845Œ
1914). A native doctor by profession, 
he was an erudite scholar. He also came 

under the influence of Colonel Olcott 
of the Theosophical Society. In the 
1890s he began a movement among the 
Adi Dravidars arguing that they were 
the original Buddhists who had been 

consigned to ‚untouchability™ due to their 
opposition to Vedic Brahminism. He re-
read classical Tamil and other texts to 

make his case. He also encouraged the 
conversion to Buddhism. He found the 
greatest following in north Tamilnadu 
and among the working classes of the 

161Christian missionaries. It must be noted that 
the Christian Missionaries took the intiative 
of establishing Hospitals and Dispensaries.  
19.8Reform MovementsThe orthodox sections of the society could 
not accept the scientific and ideological 
onslaught of the socio-religious reformers. 
As a result of this, the reformers were 
subjected to abuse, persecution, issuing 
of fatwas and even assassination attempts 

by the reactionaries. However, in 
spite of opposition, these movements 
contributed towards liberation of the 
individual from the conformity born out 
of fear. The translation of religious texts 

into vernacular languages, emphasis 
on an individual™s right to interpret the 
scriptures, and simplification of rituals 

made worship a more personal experience. 
The movements emphasised the human 
intellect™s capacity to reason and think. By 
weeding out corrupt elements in religious 
practices, the reformers enabled their 

followers to counter the official taunt that 
their religions and society were decadent 
and inferior. It gave the rising middle 

classes the much needed cultural roots to 
cling to.
deprived and pleaded for their economic 
improvement through employment in the 

state service. They also fought for their 
‚civil rights™ that included access to public 
roads, and permission for the women of 
these groups to wear upper garments.
The missionaries gave shelter to 
orphaned children and other destitute 

widows in their missions and provided 
education for them in their boarding 
schools. Particularly after the famines 
which were quite common during 

the nineteenth century, about which 
we discussed in the previous lesson, 
the missionaries organized relief. 

Providing shelter and succour gave 
these an opportunity to convert people 
to Christianity. In Tirunelveli district 
many villages took to Christianity 
during famines, especially in the last 

quarter of nineteenth century. The same 
phenomenon was witnessed in Andhra 
where Malas and Madigas embraced 
Christianity in a big way.  
˜e Company government did little 
to provide modern education for the native 

population. For a long time, the provision 
of elementary school facilities to the native 

population, especially in the interiors for 
the disprivileged and the poor people, was 
a responsibility willingly accepted by the 
SUMMARYThe role played by Rammohun Roy, and Keshab Chandra Sen in Brahmo Samaj are 
discussed
The contribution of Atmaram Pandurang, M.G. Ranade through Prarthana Samaj is 

examined 
Arya Samaj established by Dayananda Saraswati, and the Ramakrishna Mission founded 

by Swami Vivekananda are dealt with. 
Aligarh, Ahmadiya, and Deoband movements for reforming Islamic community are 

explained
Parsi, Sikh reform movements as well as the work of Theosophical society are described.
The social reform movements represented by Jyotiba Phule, Pandita Ramabai and 

Narayana Guru and by Ramalinga Adigal, Vaikunda Swamy and Iyotheethoss Pandithar 

in Tamilnadu are highlighted   
Services rendered by Christian missionaries are analysed.

162EXERCISE I. Choose the correct answer
 1. ____________ was the first province, where several ideas of reforms originated.
 a) Punjab
 b) Bengal
 c) Bombay
 d) Madras
 2. ﬁThe Father of Indian Renaissanceﬂ was ____________.
 a) Swami Vivekananda
 b) Dayananda Saraswathi
 c) Raja Rammohan Roy
 d) Atmaram Pandurang
 3. The National Social Conference was organized at the initiative of ____________.
 a) M. G. Ranade
 b) Devendranath Tagore
 c) Keshab Chandra Sen
 d) Ramakrishna Paramahamsa
 4. ﬁBack to the Vedasﬂ was the motto of ____________.
 a) Raja Rammohan Roy
 b) Dayananda Saraswathi
 c) Vivekananda
 d) Ramakrishina Paramahamsa
 5. ____________ expounded his views in short stories and admirable parables.
  a) Ramakrishna Paramahamsa
 b) Devendranath Tagore
 c) Vivekananda
 d) Jyotiba Phule
 6. The Weekly Journal "
Oru Paisa
" Tamilan was run by ____________.
 a) Swami Vivekananda
 b) Dayananda Saraswathi
 c) Vaikunda Swamigal
 d) Iyotheethoss Pandithar
 7. The Theosophical Society was founded in ____________.
 a) India
 b) United States of America
 c) France
 d) England
 8. ------------------- was the adherent of Brahmo Samaj in Tamilnadu.
 a) Ramalinga Adigal
 b) Kasi Viswanatha Mudaliar
 c) Iyotheethoss Pandithar
 d) Pandita Ramabai
 9. Syed Ahmad Khan founded a ____________ for the introduction of Western Sciences.
 a) Satya Shodak Samaj
 b) Singh Sabha Movement
 c) Scienti˙c Society
 d) ˜eosophical Society
 10. The aim of the ____________ was the religious regeneration of the Muslim community.
 a) Deoband Movement 
 b) Ahmadiya Movement
 c) Aligarh Movement
 d) Wahhabi Movement
 II A. Find out the correct statement 
  (i) Dr. Atmaram Pandurang founded the Shuddi Movement.
  (ii)  
Samathuva Sangam was founded by 
Vaikunda Swamigal.
  (iii) The founder of Ramakrishna Mission was Ramakrishna Paramahamsa.
  (iv)
 The Ahmadiyas have common mosque for prayer.

163  
B.   Assertion (A):
  Syed Ahmad Khan founded  a modern school at Aligarh, which developed 
into the  Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College.
  Reason (R):
  He wanted to promote English education among the Muslims.
  (a) A is correct ; R is the correct explanation of A
  (b) A is wrong ; R is correct
  (c) Both A and R are wrong
  (d) A is correct; R is not the correct explanation of A 
 III Match the following 
  1. English Missionaries
 - Morning Star
  2. Parsi Newspaper
 - William Carvey and John Thomas
  3. Deoband movement
 - Rast-Goftar
  4. Vivekananda
 - Mohammad Qasim Nanotavi
  a) 3, 2, 1, 4 b) 1, 2, 3, 4 c) 4, 1, 2, 3 d) 2, 1, 4, 3 IV Give your answers briefly
 1. What are  the contributions of Raja Rammohun Roy to social reform?
 2. What role did Jyotiba Phule play for social justice ?
 3. Why was the Shuddi Movement considered a revivalist movement ?
 4. Describe the contribution of SNDP Yogam.
 5. What do you know about Ramalinga Adigal?
 V Write a short note on the following
 1. M.G Ranade 
 2. Swami Vivekananda
 3. Ahmadiya Movement
 4. Singh Sabha Movement
 5. Vaikunda Swamigal
. VI Answer  in detail
 1. Discuss the role played by Christian missionaries in India.
 2. Highlight the Social Reform Movement in Tamilnadu.
 VII Activities
 1. Collect information on the current activities of the Theosophical Society at Adyar.
 2. Prepare  an account of the essence of  Swami Vivekananda™s Chicago lecture.

164 VIII Assignments
 1. Make a visit to the institutions established by the Ramakrishna Mission and write a report 
on its services
 2. Prepare an album by collecting pictures of various social reformers and identify the 

institutions they founded.
GLOSSARYvicious circle continuing unpleasant situationeruditescholarlydecrydenounce openlyiconoclasta critic of image worshipskepticismdisbeliefagnosticismone who is indifferent to religion or existence of godpolemicsa strong verbal or written attack on 

someone or somethingfatwaa ruling by a recognized authority 

according to Islamic law
  REFERENCES 1. Anthony Giddens, 
The Consequences of Modernity
, Stanford University Press, 1990
 2. D.P. Chattopadhyaya,  
History of Science, Philosophy and Culture in Indian Civilization,˛
Vol.
III, Pearson Longman, 2008.
 3. A.L. Basham, 
A Cultural History of India, 
OUP, 1975.
 4. C.B. Firth, 
Church History in India,˛
1960. 5. Meghnad Desai,ˆ
The Rediscovery of India,
 Allen Lane (Penguin), 2009.
 6. Sumit Sarkar and Tanika Sarkar,ˆ
Women and Social Reform in Modern India:˛A Reader
, Indiana University Press, 2008.
TIME LINE (AD/CE)Serampore Mission
1799 
Birth of Vaikunda Swamigal
1809Birth of Ramalinga Swamigal
1823Brahmo Samaj
1828Birth of Iyotheethoss Pandithar
1845Prarthana Samaj
1867Arya Samaj
1875Aligarh Movement
1875Ramakrishna Mission
1897Sikh Gurudwara Act
1922
165Accountable responsibleAccumulated gatheredagnosticismone who is indifferent to religion or existence of godAnathema DetestableBard Poet
belligerent policypolicy of intense war force
breachviolatecededgranting of some possessions
Cockade a small ribbon on a hatConspiracy plotcontingenta part of a military forcecupolas a small dome, on the top of a larger 
dome, adorning a roof or ceiling decrydenounce openlydevastated destroyed
devouredto eat or swallow something eagerly
draconianheartlessecclesiastical headhead of the Roman Catholic church
EcstaticJoyful, blissful
Elude Escapeemanating originate, derive, emerge 
endorsementapproval
eruditescholarlyevasiveness avoidable
farrier

plates for horse™s feet
fatwaa ruling by a recognized authority 

according to Islamic law
Feudatories chieftain holding land under feudal 
systemGLOSSARY
166Glossary
forsaking abandoningHagiographical

the lives of saints
iconoclasta critic of image worshipimpregnableindestructiblein pursuancea follow upincursiona sudden attackingenuity inventiveness, cleverness 
insurrectionrebellionintrigue secret planning of something illicit, 
plotting IntuitiveFeeling to be true even without 

conscious reasoninginvincibilityimpossible to defeatIrkedirritatedlacqueware articles that have a decorative 

lacquer coating  metamorphosis a complete changeObnoxious Offensive
paramountsupremeParleysholding discussionPatronisesponsorpedagogyteaching methodPervasivenessPresence felt throughout a place or 
thingpillageloot expecially during war
polemicsa strong verbal or written attack on 

someone or somethingpolitical turmoil a state of confusionPre-empt take action in order to prevent
Protracted lasting for a long timeravageplunderreeler one who winds something on a reel  

167Glossaryrelentlessunyielding
revamped changed something againscalpelsurgical knifeFightshipwright ship builder Shunavoid
skepticismdisbeliefsolidarityunity for causes
stranded 
SublimatePurify
Syncretism Amalgamation of different religious and culturestraitorous disloyal, backstabbing  
Truncated reduced in size
Vanquishedconqueredvicious circle continuing unpleasant situationVolley 
arms togetherCREDITS FOR IMAGESDepartment of State Archaeology, Tamilnadu
Archaeology Survey of India
Tamil Virtual Academy
www.wikipedia.org
https://commons.wikimedia.org
 https://wikitech.wikimedia.org
Google Art Project
British Library
metmuseum 

Prince_of_Wales_museum
www. himalayanacademy.com 
www.historydiscussion.net

Rod Hudson UK

Higher Secondary Œ Class XI  Œ History - Volume II
List of Authors and Reviewers
Lesson Writers
Dr. K.A. Manikumar,
 Professor (Retired), Dept. of History, 
Manonmaniam Sundaranar University,  Tirunelveli.
Prof. Y.S. Subbarayalu,
 Professor (Rtd.), Department of 
Epigraphy, Tamil University ˜anjavur.
Dr. Bernard D  Samy 
Research Centre, Loyola College, Chennai.
Dr. S. Ananthakrishnan
Associate Professor of History
A.M. Jain College, Chennai.
Dr. ˜angam
Associate Professor of History

STC, Palayamkottai.
D. Abul Fazal
Asst. Professor of History,

Islamiah College, Vaniyambadi, Vellore.
Dr. Murugan J,
Asst. Professor of History, 

Arignar Anna Govt Arts College,

Attur, Salem.
Content Providers / Readers
S. Rajeswari
B.T. Asst. (History)

GHSS, Nellikkuppam, Kanchipuram.
Tmt. Geetha J
PGT, Prince Mat. HSS, Madipakkam, Chennai.
Cynthia Jude
Asst. Professor, Dept. of History

Stella Mary™s College, Chennai.
G. Satheeshkumar
P.G. Asst. (History)

GBHSS, Musiri, Trichy.
P. Vedapureesan
P.G. Asst. (History), GHSS, Azhiyur

Nagapattinam
D. Muthu
P.G. Asst. (History), GHSS, Ladavaram

˜iruvannamalai
A. Sahaya Sini
B.T. Asst. (History), GHSS, Nemmeli

Kancheepuram
Chairperson
Dr. A.R. Venkatachalapathy,
 Professor
Madras Institute of Development Studies
Chennai.
Co-Chairperson
Dr. K.A. Manikumar, 
Professor of History, (Retired) 
Manonmaniam Sundaranar University,  Tirunelveli.
Reviewers
Dr. Kanakalatha Mukund,
 Professor (Retired), Centre for 
Economic and Social Studies, Hyderabad.
Dr. Surendar Rao,
 Former Professor of History, Mangalore 
University, Mangala Gangothri.
Dr. S. Ravichandran
Associate Professor of History (Retd.)
Rajapalayam Rajus™ College.

Rajapalayam.
Academic Co-ordinator
Dr. K. Suresh,
 B.T. Asst.,
Kumara Rajah Muthiah HSS, Chennai.
Illustration
K.T. Gandhi Rajan,
Tamil Virtual Academy,
K.Dhanas Deepak Rajan

K. Nalan Nancy Rajan
M. Charles
Layout
Arockiam Felix
Chennai
Wrapper Design
Kathir Arumugam
Typist
G. Gowri
ICT Coordinators
R.Kamesh 
SGT Govt.Primary School,
Pinjanur, Cuddalore
A.Saranya, 
SGT, PUP School, 
Sellathapalayam, Erode
Coordination
Ramesh Munisamy
Wrapper Design
Front Wrapper - Vasco-da-gama meeting Zamorin
Back Wrapper - Chatrapathi Shivaji
˜is book has been printed on 80 G.S.M. 
 Elegant Maplitho paper.

Printed by o˚set at:
QR Code Management Team
 R. Jaganathan 
- PUMS
 Ganesapuram- Polur
N. Jagan 
- GBHSS
 Uthiramerur
J.F.Paul Edwin Roy 
-PUMS
 Rakkipatty, Salem.

NOTES

NOTES

NOTES

NOTES
